## TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS

== Article 1: Subject matter
1. This Regulation lays down:
(a) harmonised rules for the placing on the market, the putting into service and the use of artificial intelligence systems (‘AI systems’) in the Union;
(a) prohibitions of certain artificial intelligence practices;
(b) specific requirements for high-risk AI systems and obligations for operators of such systems;
(c) harmonised transparency rules for certain AI systems;
(d) rules on market monitoring, market surveillance and governance;
(e) measures in support of innovation.

== Article 2: Scope
1. This Regulation applies to:
(a) providers placing on the market or putting into service AI systems in the Union, irrespective of whether those providers are physically present or established within the Union or in a third country;
(b) users of AI systems who are physically present or established within the Union;
(c) providers and users of AI systems who are physically present or established in a third country, where the output produced by the system is used in the Union;
(d) importers and distributors of AI systems;
(e) product manufacturers placing on the market or putting into service an AI system together with their product and under their own name or trademark;
(f) authorised representatives of providers, which are established in the Union;
2. For AI systems classified as high-risk AI systems in accordance with Articles 6(1) and 6(2) related to products covered by Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex II, section B only Article 84 of this Regulation shall apply. Article 53 shall apply only insofar as the requirements for high-risk AI systems under this Regulation have been integrated under that Union harmonisation legislation.
3. This Regulation shall not apply to AI systems if and insofar placed on the market, put into service, or used with or without modification of such systems for the purpose of activities which fall outside the scope of Union law, and in any event activities concerning military, defence or national security, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities.
In addition, this Regulation shall not apply to AI systems which are not placed on the market or put into service in the Union, where the output is used in the Union for the purpose of activities which fall outside the scope of Union law, and in any event activities concerning military, defence or national security, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities.
4. This Regulation shall not apply to public authorities in a third country nor to international organisations falling within the scope of this Regulation pursuant to paragraph 1, where those authorities or organisations use AI systems in the framework of international agreements for law enforcement and judicial cooperation with the Union or with one or more Member States.
5. This Regulation shall not affect the application of the provisions on the liability of intermediary service providers set out in Chapter II, Section 4 of Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council31 [as to be replaced by the corresponding provisions of the Digital Services Act].
6. This Regulation shall not apply to AI systems, including their output, specifically developed and put into service for the sole purpose of scientific research and development.
7. This Regulation shall not apply to any research and development activity regarding AI systems.
8. This Regulation shall not apply to obligations of users who are natural persons using AI systems in the course of a purely personal non-professional activity, except Article 52.

== Article 3: Definitions
0. For the purpose of this Regulation, the following definitions apply:
1. ‘artificial intelligence system’ (AI system) means a system that is designed to operate with elements of autonomy and that, based on machine and/or human-provided data and inputs, infers how to achieve a given set of objectives using machine learning and/or logic- and knowledge based approaches, and produces system-generated outputs such as content (generative AI systems), predictions, recommendations or decisions, influencing the environments with which the AI system interacts;
1a. ‘life cycle of an AI system’ means the duration of an AI system, from design through retirement. Without prejudice to the powers of the market surveillance authorities, such retirement may happen at any point in time during the post-market monitoring phase upon the decision of the provider and implies that the system may not be used further. An AI system lifecycle is also ended by a substantial modification to the AI system made by the provider or any other natural or legal person, in which case the substantially modified AI system shall be considered as a new AI system.
1b. ‘general purpose AI system’ means an AI system that - irrespective of how it is placed on the market or put into service, including as open source software - is intended by the provider to perform generally applicable functions such as image and speech recognition, audio and video generation, pattern detection, question answering, translation and others; a general purpose AI system may be used in a plurality of contexts and be integrated in a plurality of other AI systems;
2. ‘provider’ means a natural or legal person, public authority, agency or other body that develops an AI system or that has an AI system developed and places that system on the market or puts it into service under its own name or trademark, whether for payment or free of charge;
3. [deleted];
3a. ‘small and medium-sized enterprise’ (SMEs) means an enterprise as defined in the Annex of Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises;
4. ‘user’ means any natural or legal person, including a public authority, agency or other body, under whose authority the system is used;
5. ‘authorised representative’ means any natural or legal person physically present or established in the Union who has received and accepted a written mandate from a provider of an AI system to, respectively, perform and carry out on its behalf the obligations and procedures established by this Regulation;
5a. ‘product manufacturer’ means a manufacturer within the meaning of any of the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex II;
6. ‘importer’ means any natural or legal person physically present or established in the Union that places on the market an AI system that bears the name or trademark of a natural or legal person established outside the Union;
7. ‘distributor’ means any natural or legal person in the supply chain, other than the provider or the importer, that makes an AI system available on the Union market;
8. ‘operator’ means the provider, the product manufacturer, the user, the authorised representative, the importer or the distributor;
9. ‘placing on the market’ means the first making available of an AI system on the Union market;
10. ‘making available on the market’ means any supply of an AI system for distribution or use on the Union market in the course of a commercial activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge;
11. ‘putting into service’ means the supply of an AI system for first use directly to the user or for own use in the Union for its intended purpose;
12. ‘intended purpose’ means the use for which an AI system is intended by the provider, including the specific context and conditions of use, as specified in the information supplied by the provider in the instructions for use, promotional or sales materials and statements, as well as in the technical documentation;
13. ‘reasonably foreseeable misuse’ means the use of an AI system in a way that is not in accordance with its intended purpose, but which may result from reasonably foreseeable human behaviour or interaction with other systems;
14. ‘safety component of a product or system’ means a component of a product or of a system which fulfils a safety function for that product or system or the failure or malfunctioning of which endangers the health and safety of persons or property;
15. ‘instructions for use’ means the information provided by the provider to inform the user of in particular an AI system’s intended purpose and proper use;
16. ‘recall of an AI system’ means any measure aimed at achieving the return to the provider or taking it out of service or disabling the use of an AI system made available to users;
17. ‘withdrawal of an AI system’ means any measure aimed at preventing an AI system in the supply chain being made available on the market;
18. ‘performance of an AI system’ means the ability of an AI system to achieve its intended purpose;
19. ‘conformity assessment’ means the process of verifying whether the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of this Regulation relating to a high-risk AI system have been fulfilled;
20. ‘notifying authority’ means the national authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring;
21. ‘conformity assessment body’ means a body that performs third-party conformity assessment activities, including testing, certification and inspection;
22. ‘notified body’ means a conformity assessment body designated in accordance with this Regulation and other relevant Union harmonisation legislation;
23. ‘substantial modification’ means a change to the AI system following its placing on the market or putting into service which affects the compliance of the AI system with the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of this Regulation, or a modification to the intended purpose for which the AI system has been assessed. For high-risk AI systems that continue to learn after being placed on the market or put into service, changes to the high risk AI system and its performance that have been pre-determined by the provider at the moment of the initial conformity assessment and are part of the information contained in the technical documentation referred to in point 2(f) of Annex IV, shall not constitute a substantial modification.
24. ‘CE marking of conformity’ (CE marking) means a marking by which a provider indicates that an AI system is in conformity with the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 or in Article 4b of this Regulation and other applicable Union legal act harmonising the conditions for the marketing of products (‘Union harmonisation legislation’) providing for its affixing;
25. ‘post-market monitoring system’ means all activities carried out by providers of AI systems to collect and review experience gained from the use of AI systems they place on the market or put into service for the purpose of identifying any need to immediately apply any necessary corrective or preventive actions;
26. ‘market surveillance authority’ means the national authority carrying out the activities and taking the measures pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/1020;
27. ‘harmonised standard’ means a European standard as defined in Article 2(1)(c) of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012;
28. ‘common specification’ means a set of technical specifications, as defined in point 4 of Article 2 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 providing means to comply with certain requirements established under this Regulation;
29. ‘training data’ means data used for training an AI system through fitting its learnable parameters;
30. ‘validation data’ means data used for providing an evaluation of the trained AI system and for tuning its non-learnable parameters and its learning process, among other things, in order to prevent overfitting; whereas the validation dataset can be a separate dataset or part of the training dataset, either as a fixed or variable split;
31. ‘testing data’ means data used for providing an independent evaluation of the trained and validated AI system in order to confirm the expected performance of that system before its placing on the market or putting into service;
32. ‘input data’ means data provided to or directly acquired by an AI system on the basis of which the system produces an output;
33. ‘biometric data’ means personal data resulting from specific technical processing relating to the physical, physiological or behavioural characteristics of a natural person, such as facial images or dactyloscopic data;
34. ‘emotion recognition system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying or inferring psychological states, emotions or intentions of natural persons on the basis of their biometric data;
35. ‘biometric categorisation system’ means an AI system for the purpose of assigning natural persons to specific categories on the basis of their biometric data;
36. ‘remote biometric identification system’ means an AI system for the purpose of identifying natural persons typically at a distance, without their active involvement, through the comparison of a person’s biometric data with the biometric data contained in a reference data repository;
37. ‘‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system’ means a remote biometric identification system whereby the capturing of biometric data, the comparison and the identification all occur instantaneously or near instantaneously;
38. [deleted]
39. ‘publicly accessible space’ means any publicly or privately owned physical place accessible to an undetermined number of natural persons regardless of whether certain conditions or circumstances for access have been predetermined, and regardless of the potential capacity restrictions;
40. ‘law enforcement authority’ means:
(a) any public authority competent for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security; or
(b) any other body or entity entrusted by Member State law to exercise public authority and public powers for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security;
41. ‘law enforcement’ means activities carried out by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf for the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security;
42. [deleted]
43. ‘national competent authority’ means any of the following: the notifying authority and the market surveillance authority. As regards AI systems put into service or used by EU institutions, agencies, offices and bodies, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall fulfil the responsibilities that in the Member States are entrusted to the national competent authority and, as relevant, any reference to national competent authorities or market surveillance authorities in this Regulation shall be understood as referring to the European Data Protection Supervisor;
44. ‘serious incident’ means any incident or malfunctioning of an AI system that directly or indirectly leads to any of the following:
(a) the death of a person or serious damage to a person’s health;
(b) a serious and irreversible disruption of the management and operation of critical infrastructure;
(c) breach of obligations under Union law intended to protect fundamental rights; (d) serious damage to property or the environment.
45. ‘critical infrastructure’ means an asset, system or part thereof which is necessary for the delivery of a service that is essential for the maintenance of vital societal functions or economic activities within the meaning of Article 2(4) and (5) of Directive …../….. on the resilience of critical entities;
46. ‘personal data’ means data as defined in point (1) of Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679;
47. ‘non-personal data’ means data other than personal data as defined in point (1) of Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679;
48. ‘testing in real world conditions’ means the temporary testing of an AI system for its intended purpose in real world conditions outside of a laboratory or otherwise simulated environment with a view to gathering reliable and robust data and to assessing and verifying the conformity of the AI system with the requirements of this Regulation; testing in real world conditions shall not be considered as placing the AI system on the market or putting it into service within the meaning of this Regulation, provided that all conditions under Article 53 or Article 54a are fulfilled;
49. ‘real world testing plan’ means a document that describes the objectives, methodology, geographical, population and temporal scope, monitoring, organisation and conduct of testing in real world conditions;
50. ‘subject’ for the purpose of real world testing means a natural person who participates in testing in real world conditions;
51. ‘informed consent’ means a subject's free and voluntary expression of his or her willingness to participate in a particular testing in real world conditions, after having been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to the subject's decision to participate; in the case of minors and of incapacitated subjects, the informed consent shall be given by their legally designated representative;
52. ‘AI regulatory sandbox’ means a concrete framework set up by a national competent authority which offers providers or prospective providers of AI systems the possibility to develop, train, validate and test, where appropriate in real world conditions, an innovative AI system, pursuant to a specific plan for a limited time under regulatory supervision.

== Article 4: Implementing acts
1. In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation as regards machine learning approaches and logic- and knowledged based approaches referred to in Article 3(1), the Commission may adopt implementing acts to specify the technical elements of those approaches, taking into account market and technological developments. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2).

## TITLE IA: GENERAL PURPOSE AI SYSTEMS

== Article 4a: Compliance of general purpose AI systems with this Regulation
1. Without prejudice to Articles 5, 52, 53 and 69 of this Regulation, general purpose AI systems shall only comply with the requirements and obligations set out in Article 4b.
2. Such requirements and obligations shall apply irrespective of whether the general purpose AI system is placed on the market or put into service as a pre-trained model and whether further fine-tuning of the model is to be performed by the user of the general purpose AI system.

== Article 4b: Requirements for general purpose AI systems and obligations for providers of such systems
1. General purpose AI systems which may be used as high risk AI systems or as components of high risk AI systems in the meaning of Article 6, shall comply with the requirements established in Title III, Chapter 2 of this Regulation as from the date of application of the implementing acts adopted by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2) no later than 18 months after the entry into force of this Regulation. Those implementing acts shall specify and adapt the application of the requirements established in Title III, Chapter 2 to general purpose AI systems in the light of their characteristics, technical feasibility, specificities of the AI value chain and of market and technological developments. When fulfilling those requirements, the generally acknowledged state of the art shall be taken into account.
2. Providers of general purpose AI systems referred to in paragraph 1 shall comply, as from the date of application of the implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1, with the obligations set out in Articles 16aa, 16e, 16f, 16g, 16i, 16j, 25, 48 and 61.
3. For the purpose of complying with the obligations set out in Article 16e, providers shall follow the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control set out in Annex VI, points 3 and 4.
4. Providers of such systems shall also keep the technical documentation referred to in Article 11 at the disposal of the national competent authorities for a period ending ten years after the general purpose AI system is placed on the Union market or put into service in the Union.
5. Providers of general purpose AI systems shall cooperate with and provide the necessary information to other providers intending to put into service or place such systems on the Union market as high-risk AI systems or as components of high-risk AI systems, with a view to enabling the latter to comply with their obligations under this Regulation. Such cooperation between providers shall preserve, as appropriate, intellectual property rights, and confidential business information or trade secrets in accordance with Article 70. In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation as regards the information to be shared by the providers of general purpose AI systems, the Commission may adopt implementing acts in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2).
6. In complying with the requirements and obligations referred to in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3:
- any reference to the intended purpose shall be understood as referring to possible use of the general purpose AI systems as high risk AI systems or as components of AI high risk systems in the meaning of Article 6;
- any reference to the requirements for high-risk AI systems in Chapter II, Title III shall be understood as referring only to the requirements set out in the present Article.

== Article 4c: Exceptions to Article 4b
1. Article 4b shall not apply when the provider has explicitly excluded all high-risk uses in the instructions of use or information accompanying the general purpose AI system.
2. Such exclusion shall be made in good faith and shall not be deemed justified if the provider has sufficient reasons to consider that the system may be misused.
3. When the provider detects or is informed about market misuse they shall take all necessary and proportionate measures to prevent such further misuse, in particular taking into account the scale of the misuse and the seriousness of the associated risks.

## TITLE II:PROHIBITED ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE PRACTICES

== Article 5:
1. The following artificial intelligence practices shall be prohibited:
(a) the placing on the market, putting into service or use of an AI system that deploys subliminal techniques beyond a person’s consciousness with the objective to or the effect of materially distorting a person’s behaviour in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person or another person physical or psychological harm;
(b) the placing on the market, putting into service or use of an AI system that exploits any of the vulnerabilities of a specific group of persons due to their age, disability or a specific social or economic situation, with the objective to or the effect of materially distorting the behaviour of a person pertaining to that group in a manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause that person or another person physical or psychological harm;
(c) the placing on the market, putting into service or use of AI systems for the evaluation or classification of natural persons over a certain period of time based on their social behaviour or known or predicted personal or personality characteristics, with the social score leading to either or both of the following:
(i) detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups thereof in social contexts which are unrelated to the contexts in which the data was originally generated or collected;
(ii) detrimental or unfavourable treatment of certain natural persons or groups thereof that is unjustified or disproportionate to their social behaviour or its gravity;
(d) the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces by law enforcement authorities or on their behalf for the purpose of law enforcement, unless and in as far as such use is strictly necessary for one of the following objectives:
(i) the targeted search for specific potential victims of crime;
(ii) the prevention of a specific and substantial threat to the critical infrastructure, life, health or physical safety of natural persons or the prevention of terrorist attacks;
(iii) the localisation or identification of a natural person for the purposes of conducting a criminal investigation, prosecution or executing a criminal penalty for offences, referred to in Article 2(2) of Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA32 and punishable in the Member State concerned by a custodial sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least three years, or other specific offences punishable in the Member State concerned by a custodial sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least five years, as determined by the law of that Member State.
2. The use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement for any of the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 point d) shall take into account the following elements:
(a) the nature of the situation giving rise to the possible use, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of the harm caused in the absence of the use of the system;
(b) the consequences of the use of the system for the rights and freedoms of all persons concerned, in particular the seriousness, probability and scale of those consequences.
In addition, the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement for any of the objectives referred to in paragraph 1 point d) shall comply with necessary and proportionate safeguards and conditions in relation to the use, in particular as regards the temporal, geographic and personal limitations.
3. As regards paragraphs 1, point (d) and 2, each use for the purpose of law enforcement of a ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system in publicly accessible spaces shall be subject to a prior authorisation granted by a judicial authority or by an independent administrative authority of the Member State in which the use is to take place, issued upon a reasoned request and in accordance with the detailed rules of national law referred to in paragraph 4. However, in a duly justified situation of urgency, the use of the system may be commenced without an authorisation provided that, such authorisation shall be requested without undue delay during use of the AI system, and if such authorisation is rejected, its use shall be stopped with immediate effect.
The competent judicial or administrative authority shall only grant the authorisation where it is satisfied, based on objective evidence or clear indications presented to it, that the use of the ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system at issue is necessary for and proportionate to achieving one of the objectives specified in paragraph 1, point (d), as identified in the request. In deciding on the request, the competent judicial or administrative authority shall take into account the elements referred to in paragraph 2.
4. A Member State may decide to provide for the possibility to fully or partially authorise the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement within the limits and under the conditions listed in paragraphs 1, point (d), 2 and 3. That Member State shall lay down in its national law the necessary detailed rules for the request, issuance and exercise of, as well as supervision and reporting relating to, the authorisations referred to in paragraph 3. Those rules shall also specify in respect of which of the objectives listed in paragraph 1, point (d), including which of the criminal offences referred to in point (iii) thereof, the competent authorities may be authorised to use those systems for the purpose of law enforcement.

## TITLE III:HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS

** Chapter 1: CLASSIFICATION OF AI SYSTEMS AS HIGH-RISK

== Article 6: Classification rules for high-risk AI systems
1. An AI system that is itself a product covered by the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex II shall be considered as high risk if it is required to undergo a third-party conformity assessment with a view to the placing on the market or putting into service of that product pursuant to the above mentioned legislation.
2. An AI system intended to be used as a safety component of a product covered by the legislation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be considered as high risk if it is required to undergo a third-party conformity assessment with a view to the placing on the market or putting into service of that product pursuant to above mentioned legislation. This provision shall apply irrespective of whether the AI system is placed on the market or put into service independently from the product.
3. AI systems referred to in Annex III shall be considered high-risk unless the output of the system is purely accessory in respect of the relevant action or decision to be taken and is not therefore likely to lead to a significant risk to the health, safety or fundamental rights.
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, the Commission shall, no later than one year after the entry into force of this Regulation, adopt implementing acts to specify the circumstances where the output of AI systems referred to in Annex III would be purely accessory in respect of the relevant action or decision to be taken. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74, paragraph 2.

== Article 7: Amendments to Annex III
1. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 73 to amend the list in Annex III by adding high-risk AI systems where both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) the AI systems are intended to be used in any of the areas listed in points 1 to 8 of Annex III;
(b) the AI systems pose a risk of harm to the health and safety, or a risk of adverse impact on fundamental rights, that is, in respect of its severity and probability of occurrence, equivalent to or greater than the risk of harm or of adverse impact posed by the high-risk AI systems already referred to in Annex III.
2. When assessing for the purposes of paragraph 1 whether an AI system poses a risk of harm to the health and safety or a risk of adverse impact on fundamental rights that is equivalent to or greater than the risk of harm posed by the high-risk AI systems already referred to in Annex III, the Commission shall take into account the following criteria:
(a) the intended purpose of the AI system;
(b) the extent to which an AI system has been used or is likely to be used;
(c) the extent to which the use of an AI system has already caused harm to the health and safety or adverse impact on the fundamental rights or has given rise to significant concerns in relation to the materialisation of such harm or adverse impact, as demonstrated by reports or documented allegations submitted to national competent authorities;
(d) the potential extent of such harm or such adverse impact, in particular in terms of its intensity and its ability to affect a plurality of persons;
(e) the extent to which potentially harmed or adversely impacted persons are dependent on the outcome produced with an AI system, in particular because for practical or legal reasons it is not reasonably possible to opt-out from that outcome;
(f) the extent to which potentially harmed or adversely impacted persons are in a vulnerable position in relation to the user of an AI system, in particular due to an imbalance of power, knowledge, economic or social circumstances, or age;
(g) the extent to which the outcome produced with an AI system is not easily reversible, whereby outcomes having an impact on the health or safety of persons shall not be considered as easily reversible;
(h) the extent to which existing Union legislation provides for:
(i) effective measures of redress in relation to the risks posed by an AI system, with the exclusion of claims for damages;
(ii) effective measures to prevent or substantially minimise those risks;
(iii) the magnitude and likelihood of benefit of the AI use for individuals, groups, or society at large.
3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 73 to amend the list in Annex III by removing high-risk AI systems where both of the following conditions are fulfilled:
(a) the high-risk AI system(s) concerned no longer pose any significant risks to fundamental rights, health or safety, taking into account the criteria listed in paragraph 2;
(b) the deletion does not decrease the overall level of protection of health, safety and fundamental rights under Union law.

** Chapter 2: REQUIREMENTS FOR HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS

== Article 8: Compliance with the requirements
1. High-risk AI systems shall comply with the requirements established in this Chapter, taking into account the generally acknowledged state of the art.
2. The intended purpose of the high-risk AI system and the risk management system referred to in Article 9 shall be taken into account when ensuring compliance with those requirements.

== Article 9: Risk management system
1. A risk management system shall be established, implemented, documented and maintained in relation to high-risk AI systems.
2. The risk management system shall be understood as a continuous iterative process planned and run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI system, requiring regular systematic updating. It shall comprise the following steps:
(a) identification and analysis of the known and foreseeable risks most likely to occur to health, safety and fundamental rights in view of the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system;
(b) [deleted];
(c) evaluation of other possibly arising risks based on the analysis of data gathered from the post-market monitoring system referred to in Article 61;
(d) adoption of suitable risk management measures in accordance with the provisions of the following paragraphs.
The risks referred to in this paragraph shall concern only those which may be reasonably mitigated or eliminated through the development or design of the high-risk AI system, or the provision of adequate technical information.
3. The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d) shall give due consideration to the effects and possible interaction resulting from the combined application of the requirements set out in this Chapter 2, with a view to minimising risks more effectively while achieving an appropriate balance in implementing the measures to fulfil those requirements.
4. The risk management measures referred to in paragraph 2, point (d) shall be such that any residual risk associated with each hazard as well as the overall residual risk of the high-risk AI systems is judged acceptable.
In identifying the most appropriate risk management measures, the following shall be ensured:
(a) elimination or reduction of risks identified and evaluated pursuant to paragraph 2 as far as possible through adequate design and development of the high risk AI system;
(b) where appropriate, implementation of adequate mitigation and control measures in relation to risks that cannot be eliminated;
(c) provision of adequate information pursuant to Article 13, in particular as regards the risks referred to in paragraph 2, point (b) of this Article, and, where appropriate, training to users.
With a view to eliminating or reducing risks related to the use of the high-risk AI system, due consideration shall be given to the technical knowledge, experience, education, training to be expected by the user and the environment in which the system is intended to be used.
5. High-risk AI systems shall be tested in order to ensure that high-risk AI systems perform in a manner that is consistent with their intended purpose and they are in compliance with the requirements set out in this Chapter.
6. Testing procedures may include testing in real world conditions in accordance with Article 54a.
7. The testing of the high-risk AI systems shall be performed, as appropriate, at any point in time throughout the development process, and, in any event, prior to the placing on the market or the putting into service. Testing shall be made against preliminarily defined metrics and probabilistic thresholds that are appropriate to the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system.
8. The risk management system described in paragraphs 1 to 7 shall give specific consideration to whether the high-risk AI system is likely to be accessed by or have an impact on persons under the age of 18.
9. For providers of high-risk AI systems that are subject to requirements regarding internal risk management processes under relevant sectorial Union law, the aspects described in paragraphs 1 to 8 may be part of the risk management procedures established pursuant to that law.

== Article 10: Data and data governance
1. High-risk AI systems which make use of techniques involving the training of models with data shall be developed on the basis of training, validation and testing data sets that meet the quality criteria referred to in paragraphs 2 to 5.
2. Training, validation and testing data sets shall be subject to appropriate data governance and management practices. Those practices shall concern in particular,
(a) the relevant design choices;
(b) data collection processes;
(c) relevant data preparation processing operations, such as annotation, labelling, cleaning, enrichment and aggregation;
(d) the formulation of relevant assumptions, notably with respect to the information that the data are supposed to measure and represent;
(e) a prior assessment of the availability, quantity and suitability of the data sets that are needed;
(f) examination in view of possible biases that are likely to affect health and safety of natural persons or lead to discrimination prohibited by Union law;
(g) the identification of any possible data gaps or shortcomings, and how those gaps and shortcomings can be addressed.
3. Training, validation and testing data sets shall be relevant, representative, and to the best extent possible, free of errors and complete. They shall have the appropriate statistical properties, including, where applicable, as regards the persons or groups of persons on which the high-risk AI system is intended to be used. These characteristics of the data sets may be met at the level of individual data sets or a combination thereof.
4. Training, validation and testing data sets shall take into account, to the extent required by the intended purpose, the characteristics or elements that are particular to the specific geographical, behavioural or functional setting within which the high-risk AI system is intended to be used.
5. To the extent that it is strictly necessary for the purposes of ensuring bias monitoring, detection and correction in relation to the high-risk AI systems, the providers of such systems may process special categories of personal data referred to in Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680 and Article 10(1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, subject to appropriate safeguards for the fundamental rights and freedoms of natural persons, including technical limitations on the re-use and use of state-of-the-art security and privacy-preserving measures, such as pseudonymisation, or encryption where anonymisation may significantly affect the purpose pursued.
6. For the development of high-risk AI systems not using techniques involving the training of models, paragraphs 2 to 5 shall apply only to the testing data sets.

== Article 11: Technical documentation
1. The technical documentation of a high-risk AI system shall be drawn up before that system is placed on the market or put into service and shall be kept up-to date.
The technical documentation shall be drawn up in such a way to demonstrate that the high risk AI system complies with the requirements set out in this Chapter and provide national competent authorities and notified bodies with all the necessary information in a clear and comprehensive form to assess the compliance of the AI system with those requirements. It shall contain, at a minimum, the elements set out in Annex IV or, in the case of SMEs, including start-ups, any equivalent documentation meeting the same objectives, unless deemed inappropriate by the competent authority.
2. Where a high-risk AI system related to a product, to which the legal acts listed in Annex II, section A apply, is placed on the market or put into service one single technical documentation shall be drawn up containing all the information set out in Annex IV as well as the information required under those legal acts.
3. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 73 to amend Annex IV where necessary to ensure that, in the light of technical progress, the technical documentation provides all the necessary information to assess the compliance of the system with the requirements set out in this Chapter.

== Article 12: Record-keeping
1. High-risk AI systems shall technically allow for the automatic recording of events (‘logs’) over the duration of the life cycle of the system.
2. In order to ensure a level of traceability of the AI system’s functioning that is appropriate to the intended purpose of the system, logging capabilities shall enable the recording of events relevant for
(i) identification of situations that may result in the AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1) or in a substantial modification;
(ii) facilitation of the post-market monitoring referred to in Article 61; and
(iii) monitoring of the operation of high-risk AI systems referred to in Article 29(4).
4. For high-risk AI systems referred to in paragraph 1, point (a) of Annex III, the logging capabilities shall provide, at a minimum:
(a) recording of the period of each use of the system (start date and time and end date and time of each use);
(b) the reference database against which input data has been checked by the system; (c) the input data for which the search has led to a match;
(d) the identification of the natural persons involved in the verification of the results, as referred to in Article 14 (5).

== Article 13: Transparency and provision of information to users
1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way to ensure that their operation is sufficiently transparent with a view to achieving compliance with the relevant obligations of the user and of the provider set out in Chapter 3 of this Title and enabling users to understand and use the system appropriately.
2. High-risk AI systems shall be accompanied by instructions for use in an appropriate digital format or otherwise that include concise, complete, correct and clear information that is relevant, accessible and comprehensible to users.
3. The information referred to in paragraph 2 shall specify:
(a) the identity and the contact details of the provider and, where applicable, of its authorised representative;
(b) the characteristics, capabilities and limitations of performance of the high-risk AI system, including:
(i) its intended purpose, inclusive of the specific geographical, behavioural or functional setting within which the high-risk AI system is intended to be used;
(ii) the level of accuracy, including its metrics, robustness and cybersecurity referred to in Article 15 against which the high-risk AI system has been tested and validated and which can be expected, and any known and foreseeable circumstances that may have an impact on that expected level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity;
(iii) any known or foreseeable circumstance, related to the use of the high-risk AI system in accordance with its intended purpose, which may lead to risks to the health and safety or fundamental rights referred to in Aricle 9(2);
(iv) when appropriate, its behaviour regarding specific persons or groups of persons on which the system is intended to be used;
(v) when appropriate, specifications for the input data, or any other relevant information in terms of the training, validation and testing data sets used, taking into account the intended purpose of the AI system;
(vi) when appropriate, description of the expected output of the system.
(c) the changes to the high-risk AI system and its performance which have been pre determined by the provider at the moment of the initial conformity assessment, if any;
(d) the human oversight measures referred to in Article 14, including the technical measures put in place to facilitate the interpretation of the outputs of AI systems by the users;
(e) the computational and hardware resources needed, the expected lifetime of the high risk AI system and any necessary maintenance and care measures, including their frequency, to ensure the proper functioning of that AI system, including as regards software updates;
(f) a description of the mechanism included within the AI system that allows users to properly collect, store and interpret the logs, where relevant.

== Article 14: Human oversight
1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way, including with appropriate human-machine interface tools, that they can be effectively overseen by natural persons during the period in which the AI system is in use.
2. Human oversight shall aim at preventing or minimising the risks to health, safety or fundamental rights that may emerge when a high-risk AI system is used in accordance with its intended purpose or under conditions of reasonably foreseeable misuse, in particular when such risks persist notwithstanding the application of other requirements set out in this Chapter.
3. Human oversight shall be ensured through either one or all of the following types of measures:
(a) measures identified and built, when technically feasible, into the high-risk AI system by the provider before it is placed on the market or put into service;
(b) measures identified by the provider before placing the high-risk AI system on the market or putting it into service and that are appropriate to be implemented by the user.
4. For the purpose of implementing paragraphs 1 to 3, the high-risk AI system shall be provided to the user in such a way that natural persons to whom human oversight is assigned are enabled, as appropriate and proportionate to the circumstances:
(a) to understand the capacities and limitations of the high-risk AI system and be able to duly monitor its operation;
(b) to remain aware of the possible tendency of automatically relying or over-relying on the output produced by a high-risk AI system (‘automation bias’);
(c) to correctly interpret the high-risk AI system’s output, taking into account for example the interpretation tools and methods available;
(d) to decide, in any particular situation, not to use the high-risk AI system or otherwise disregard, override or reverse the output of the high-risk AI system;
(e) to intervene on the operation of the high-risk AI system or interrupt the system through a “stop” button or a similar procedure.
5. For high-risk AI systems referred to in point 1(a) of Annex III, the measures referred to in paragraph 3 shall be such as to ensure that, in addition, no action or decision is taken by the user on the basis of the identification resulting from the system unless this has been separately verified and confirmed by at least two natural persons. The requirement for a separate verification by at least two natural persons shall not apply to high risk AI systems used for the purpose of law enforcement, migration, border control or asylum, in cases where Union or national law considers the application of this requirement to be disproportionate.

== Article 15: Accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity
1. High-risk AI systems shall be designed and developed in such a way that they achieve, in the light of their intended purpose, an appropriate level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity, and perform consistently in those respects throughout their lifecycle.
2. The levels of accuracy and the relevant accuracy metrics of high-risk AI systems shall be declared in the accompanying instructions of use.
3. High-risk AI systems shall be resilient as regards errors, faults or inconsistencies that may occur within the system or the environment in which the system operates, in particular due to their interaction with natural persons or other systems.
The robustness of high-risk AI systems may be achieved through technical redundancy solutions, which may include backup or fail-safe plans.
High-risk AI systems that continue to learn after being placed on the market or put into service shall be developed in such a way to eliminate or reduce as far as possible the risk of possibly biased outputs influencing input for future operations (‘feedback loops’) are duly addressed with appropriate mitigation measures.
4. High-risk AI systems shall be resilient as regards attempts by unauthorised third parties to alter their use or performance by exploiting the system vulnerabilities.
The technical solutions aimed at ensuring the cybersecurity of high-risk AI systems shall be appropriate to the relevant circumstances and the risks.
The technical solutions to address AI specific vulnerabilities shall include, where appropriate, measures to prevent and control for attacks trying to manipulate the training dataset (‘data poisoning’), inputs designed to cause the model to make a mistake (‘adversarial examples’), or model flaws.

** Chapter 3: OBLIGATIONS OF PROVIDERS AND USERS OF HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS AND OTHER PARTIES

== Article 16: Obligations of providers of high-risk AI systems
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall:
(a) ensure that their high-risk AI systems are compliant with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title;
(aa) indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, the address at which they can be contacted on the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, as applicable;
(b) have a quality management system in place which complies with Article 17; (c) keep the documentation referred to in Article 18;
(d) when under their control, keep the logs automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems as referred to in Article 20;
(e) ensure that the high-risk AI system undergoes the relevant conformity assessment procedure as referred to in Article 43, prior to its placing on the market or putting into service;
(f) comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 51(1);
(g) take the necessary corrective actions as referred to in Article 21, if the high-risk AI system is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title;
(h) inform the relevant national competent authority of the Member States in which they made the AI system available or put it into service and, where applicable, the notified body of the non-compliance and of any corrective actions taken;
(i) to affix the CE marking to their high-risk AI systems to indicate the conformity with this Regulation in accordance with Article 49;
(j) upon request of a national competent authority, demonstrate the conformity of the high risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.

== Article 17: Quality management system
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall put a quality management system in place that ensures compliance with this Regulation. That system shall be documented in a systematic and orderly manner in the form of written policies, procedures and instructions, and shall include at least the following aspects:
(a) a strategy for regulatory compliance, including compliance with conformity assessment procedures and procedures for the management of modifications to the high-risk AI system;
(b) techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the design, design control and design verification of the high-risk AI system;
(c) techniques, procedures and systematic actions to be used for the development, quality control and quality assurance of the high-risk AI system;
(d) examination, test and validation procedures to be carried out before, during and after the development of the high-risk AI system, and the frequency with which they have to be carried out;
(e) technical specifications, including standards, to be applied and, where the relevant harmonised standards are not applied in full, the means to be used to ensure that the high-risk AI system complies with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title;
(f) systems and procedures for data management, including data collection, data analysis, data labelling, data storage, data filtration, data mining, data aggregation, data retention and any other operation regarding the data that is performed before and for the purposes of the placing on the market or putting into service of high-risk AI systems;
(g) the risk management system referred to in Article 9;
(h) the setting-up, implementation and maintenance of a post-market monitoring system, in accordance with Article 61;
(i) procedures related to the reporting of a serious incident in accordance with Article 62;
(j) the handling of communication with national competent authorities, competent authorities, including sectoral ones, providing or supporting the access to data, notified bodies, other operators, customers or other interested parties;
(k) systems and procedures for record keeping of all relevant documentation and information;
(l) resource management, including security of supply related measures;
(m) an accountability framework setting out the responsibilities of the management and other staff with regard to all aspects listed in this paragraph.
2. The implementation of aspects referred to in paragraph 1 shall be proportionate to the size of the provider’s organisation.
2a. For providers of high-risk AI systems that are subject to obligations regarding quality management systems under relevant sectorial Union law, the aspects described in paragraph 1 may be part of the quality management systems pursuant to that law.
3. For providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation, the obligation to put in place a quality management system with the exception of paragraph 1, points (g), (h) and (i) shall be deemed to be fulfilled by complying with the rules on internal governance arrangements or processes pursuant to the relevant Union financial services legislation. In that context, any harmonised standards referred to in Article 40 of this Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 18: Documentation keeping
1. The provider shall, for a period ending 10 years after the AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, keep at the disposal of the national competent authorities:
(a) the technical documentation referred to in Article 11;
(b) the documentation concerning the quality management system referred to in Article 17;
(c) the documentation concerning the changes approved by notified bodies where applicable;
(d) the decisions and other documents issued by the notified bodies where applicable; (e) the EU declaration of conformity referred to in Article 48.
1a. Each Member State shall determine conditions under which the documentation referred to in paragraph 1 remains at the disposal of the national competent authorities for the period indicated in that paragraph for the cases when a provider or its authorised representative established on its territory goes bankrupt or ceases its activity prior to the end of that period.
2. Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation shall maintain the technical documentation as part of the documentation kept under the relevant Union financial services legislation.

== Article 19: Conformity assessment
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall ensure that their systems undergo the relevant conformity assessment procedure in accordance with Article 43, prior to their placing on the market or putting into service. Where the compliance of the AI systems with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title has been demonstrated following that conformity assessment, the providers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity in accordance with Article 48 and affix the CE marking of conformity in accordance with Article 49.
2. [deleted]

== Article 20: Automatically generated logs
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs, referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems, to the extent such logs are under their control by virtue of a contractual arrangement with the user or otherwise by law. They shall keep them for a period of at least six months, unless provided otherwise in applicable Union or national law, in particular in Union law on the protection of personal data.
2. Providers that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation shall maintain the logs automatically generated by their high-risk AI systems as part of the documentation kept under the relevant financial service legislation.

== Article 21: Corrective actions
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems which consider or have reason to consider that a high-risk AI system which they have placed on the market or put into service is not in conformity with this Regulation shall immediately investigate, where applicable, the causes in collaboration with the reporting user and take the necessary corrective actions to bring that system into conformity, to withdraw it or to recall it, as appropriate. They shall inform the distributors of the high-risk AI system in question and, where applicable, the authorised representative and importers accordingly.

== Article 22: Duty of information
1. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1) and that risk is known to the provider of the system, that provider shall immediately inform the national competent authorities of the Member States in which it made the system available and, where applicable, the notified body that issued a certificate for the high-risk AI system, in particular of the non compliance and of any corrective actions taken.

== Article 23: Cooperation with competent authorities
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems shall, upon request by a national competent authority, provide that authority with all the information and documentation necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, in a language which can be easily understood by the authority of the Member State concerned. Upon a reasoned request from a national competent authority, providers shall also give that authority access to the logs, referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by the high-risk AI system, to the extent such logs are under their control by virtue of a contractual arrangement with the user or otherwise by law.

== Article 23a: Conditions for other persons to be subject to the obligations of a provider
1. Any natural or legal person shall be considered a provider of a new high-risk AI system for the purposes of this Regulation and shall be subject to the obligations of the provider under Article 16, in any of the following circumstances:
(a) they put their name or trademark on a high-risk AI system already placed on the market or put into service, without prejudice to contractual arrangements stipulating that the obligations are allocated otherwise;
(b) [deleted]
(c) they make a substantial modification to a high-risk AI system already placed on the market or put into service;
(d) they modify the intended purpose of an AI system which is not high-risk and is already placed on the market or put ito service, in a way which makes the modified system a high-risk AI system;
(e) they place on the market or put into service a general purpose AI system as a high risk AI system or as a component of a high-risk AI system.
2. Where the circumstances referred to in paragraph 1, point (a) or (c), occur, the provider that initially placed the high-risk AI system on the market or put it into service shall no longer be considered a provider for the purposes of this Regulation.
3. For high-risk AI systems that are safety components of products to which the legal acts listed in Annex II, section A apply, the manufacturer of those products shall be considered the provider of the high-risk AI system and shall be subject to the obligations under Article 16 under either of the following scenarios:
(i) the high-risk AI system is placed on the market together with the product under the name or trademark of the product manufacturer;
(ii) the high-risk AI system is put into service under the the name or trademark of the product manufacturer after the product has been placed on the market.

== Article 24: [deleted]

== Article 25: Authorised representatives
1. Prior to making their systems available on the Union market providers established outside the Union shall, by written mandate, appoint an authorised representative which is established in the Union.
2. The authorised representative shall perform the tasks specified in the mandate received from the provider. For the purpose of this Regulation, the mandate shall empower the authorised representative to carry out only the following tasks:
(-a) verify that the EU declaration of conformity and the technical documentation have been drawn up and that an appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the provider;
(a) keep at the disposal of the national competent authorities and national authorities referred to in Article 63(7), for a period ending 10 years after the high-risk AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, the contact details of the provider by which the authorised representative has been appointed, a copy of the EU declaration of conformity, the technical documentation and, if applicable, the certificate issued by the notified body;
(b) provide a national competent authority, upon a reasoned request, with all the information and documentation, including that kept according to point (b), necessary to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, including access to the logs, referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by the high-risk AI system to the extent such logs are under the control of the provider by virtue of a contractual arrangement with the user or otherwise by law;
(c) cooperate with national competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, on any action the latter takes in relation to the high-risk AI system.
(d) comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 51(1) and, if the registration of the system is carried out by the provider itself, verify that the information referred to in Annex VIII, Part II, 1 to 11, is correct.
The authorised representative shall terminate the mandate if it has sufficient reasons to consider that the provider acts contrary to its obligations under this Regulation. In such a case, it shall also immediately inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State in which it is established, as well as, where applicable, the relevant notified body, about the termination of the mandate and the reasons thereof.
The authorised representative shall be legally liable for defective AI systems on the same basis as, and jointly and severally with, the provider in respect of its potential liability under Council Directive 85/374/EEC.

== Article 26: Obligations of importers
1. Before placing a high-risk AI system on the market, importers of such system shall ensure that such a system is in conformity with this Regulation by verifying that:
(a) the relevant conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 43 has been carried out by the provider of that AI system;
(b) the provider has drawn up the technical documentation in accordance with Annex IV;
(c) the system bears the required CE conformity marking and is accompanied by the EU declaration of conformity and instructions of use;
(d) the authorised representative referred to in Article 25 has been established by the provider.
2. Where an importer has sufficient reasons to consider that a high-risk AI system is not in conformity with this Regulation, or is falsified, or accompanied by falsified documentation, it shall not place that system on the market until that AI system has been brought into conformity. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1), the importer shall inform the provider of the AI system, the authorised representatives and the market surveillance authorities to that effect.
3. Importers shall indicate their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark, and the address at which they can be contacted on the high-risk AI system or, where that is not possible, on its packaging or its accompanying documentation, as applicable.
4. Importers shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their responsibility, where applicable, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise its compliance with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.
4a. Importers shall keep, for a period ending 10 years after the AI system has been placed on the market or put into service, a copy of the certificate issued by the notified body, where applicable, of the instructions for use and of the EU declaration of conformity.
5. Importers shall provide national competent authorities, upon a reasoned request, with all necessary information and documentation, including that kept in accordance with paragraph 5, to demonstrate the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title in a language which can be easily understood by that national competent authority. To this purpose they shall also ensure that the technical documentation can be made available to those authorities.
5a. Importers shall cooperate with national competent authorities on any action those authorities take in relation to an AI system, of which they are the importer.

== Article 27: Obligations of distributors
1. Before making a high-risk AI system available on the market, distributors shall verify that the high-risk AI system bears the required CE conformity marking, that it is accompanied by a copy of EU declaration of conformity and instruction of use, and that the provider and the importer of the system, as applicable, have complied with their obligations set out Article 16, point (b) and 26(3) respectively.
2. Where a distributor considers or has reason to consider that a high-risk AI system is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, it shall not make the high-risk AI system available on the market until that system has been brought into conformity with those requirements. Furthermore, where the system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1), the distributor shall inform the provider or the importer of the system, as applicable, to that effect.
3. Distributors shall ensure that, while a high-risk AI system is under their responsibility, where applicable, storage or transport conditions do not jeopardise the compliance of the system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.
4. A distributor that considers or has reason to consider that a high-risk AI system which it has made available on the market is not in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title shall take the corrective actions necessary to bring that system into conformity with those requirements, to withdraw it or recall it or shall ensure that the provider, the importer or any relevant operator, as appropriate, takes those corrective actions. Where the high-risk AI system presents a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1), the distributor shall immediately inform the national competent authorities of the Member States in which it has made the product available to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective actions taken.
5. Upon a reasoned request from a national competent authority, distributors of high-risk AI systems shall provide that authority with all the information and documentation regarding its activities as described in paragraph 1 to 4.
5a. Distributors shall cooperate with national competent authorities on any action those authorities take in relation to an AI system, of which they are the distributor.

== Article 28: [deleted]

== Article 29: Obligations of users of high-risk AI systems
1. Users of high-risk AI systems shall use such systems in accordance with the instructions of use accompanying the systems, pursuant to paragraphs 2 and 5 of this Article.
1a. Users shall assign human oversight to natural persons who have the necessary competence, training and authority.
2. The obligations in paragraph 1 and 1a are without prejudice to other user obligations under Union or national law and to the user’s discretion in organising its own resources and activities for the purpose of implementing the human oversight measures indicated by the provider.
3. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, to the extent the user exercises control over the input data, that user shall ensure that input data is relevant in view of the intended purpose of the high-risk AI system.
4. Users shall implement human oversight and monitor the operation of the high-risk AI system on the basis of the instructions of use. When they have reasons to consider that the use in accordance with the instructions of use may result in the AI system presenting a risk within the meaning of Article 65(1) they shall inform the provider or distributor and suspend the use of the system. They shall also inform the provider or distributor when they have identified any serious incident and interrupt the use of the AI system. In case the user is not able to reach the provider, Article 62 shall apply mutatis mutandis. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data of users of AI systems which are law enforcement authorities.
For users that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation, the monitoring obligation set out in the first subparagraph shall be deemed to be fulfilled by complying with the rules on internal governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms pursuant to the relevant financial service legislation.
5. Users of high-risk AI systems shall keep the logs, referred to in Article 12(1), automatically generated by that high-risk AI system, to the extent such logs are under their control. They shall keep them for a period of at least six months, unless provided otherwise in applicable Union or national law, in particular in Union law on the protection of personal data.
Users that are financial institutions subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation shall maintain the logs as part of the documentation kept pursuant to the relevant Union financial service legislation.
5a. Users of high-risk AI systems that are public authorities, agencies or bodies, with the exception of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities, shall comply with the registration obligations referred to in Article 51. When they find that the system that they envisage to use has not been registered in the EU database referred to in Article 60 they shall not use that system and shall inform the provider or the distributor.
6. Users of high-risk AI systems shall use the information provided under Article 13 to comply with their obligation to carry out a data protection impact assessment under Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or Article 27 of Directive (EU) 2016/680, where applicable.
6a. Users shall cooperate with national competent authorities on any action those authorities take in relation to an AI system, of which they are the user.

** Chapter 4: NOTIFIYING AUTHORITIES AND NOTIFIED BODIES

== Article 30: Notifying authorities
1. Each Member State shall designate or establish at least one notifying authority responsible for setting up and carrying out the necessary procedures for the assessment, designation and notification of conformity assessment bodies and for their monitoring.
2. Member States may decide that the assessment and monitoring referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out by a national accreditation body within the meaning of and in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
3. Notifying authorities shall be established, organised and operated in such a way that no conflict of interest arises with conformity assessment bodies and the objectivity and impartiality of their activities are safeguarded.
4. Notifying authorities shall be organised in such a way that decisions relating to the notification of conformity assessment bodies are taken by competent persons different from those who carried out the assessment of those bodies.
5. Notifying authorities shall not offer or provide any activities that conformity assessment bodies perform or any consultancy services on a commercial or competitive basis.
6. Notifying authorities shall safeguard the confidentiality of the information they obtain in accordance with Article 70.
7. Notifying authorities shall have an adequate number of competent personnel at their disposal for the proper performance of their tasks.
8. [deleted]

== Article 31: Application of a conformity assessment body for notification
1. Conformity assessment bodies shall submit an application for notification to the notifying authority of the Member State in which they are established.
2. The application for notification shall be accompanied by a description of the conformity assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or modules and the AI systems for which the conformity assessment body claims to be competent, as well as by an accreditation certificate, where one exists, issued by a national accreditation body attesting that the conformity assessment body fulfils the requirements laid down in Article 33. Any valid document related to existing designations of the applicant notified body under any other Union harmonisation legislation shall be added.
3. Where the conformity assessment body concerned cannot provide an accreditation certificate, it shall provide the notifying authority with all the documentary evidence necessary for the verification, recognition and regular monitoring of its compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 33. For notified bodies which are designated under any other Union harmonisation legislation, all documents and certificates linked to those designations may be used to support their designation procedure under this Regulation, as appropriate. The notified body shall update the documentation referred to in paragraph 2 and paragraph 3 whenever relevant changes occur, in order to enable the authority responsible for notified bodies to monitor and verify continuous compliance with all the requirements laid down in Article 33.

== Article 32: Notification procedure
1. Notifying authorities may only notify conformity assessment bodies which have satisfied the requirements laid down in Article 33.
2. Notifying authorities shall notify those bodies to the Commission and the other Member States using the electronic notification tool developed and managed by the Commission.
3. The notification referred to in paragraph 2 shall include full details of the conformity assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or modules and the AI systems concerned and the relevant attestation of competence. Where a notification is not based on an accreditation certificate as referred to in Article 31 (2), the notifying authority shall provide the Commission and the other Member States with documentary evidence which attests to the conformity assessment body's competence and the arrangements in place to ensure that that body will be monitored regularly and will continue to satisfy the requirements laid down in Article 33.
4. The conformity assessment body concerned may perform the activities of a notified body only where no objections are raised by the Commission or the other Member States within two weeks of a notification by a notifying authority where it includes an accreditation certificate referred to in Article 31(2), or within two months of a notification by the notifying authority where it includes documentary evidence referred to in Article 31(3).
5. [deleted]

== Article 33: Requirements relating to notified bodies
1. A notified body shall be established under national law and have legal personality.
2. Notified bodies shall satisfy the organisational, quality management, resources and process requirements that are necessary to fulfil their tasks.
3. The organisational structure, allocation of responsibilities, reporting lines and operation of notified bodies shall be such as to ensure that there is confidence in the performance by and in the results of the conformity assessment activities that the notified bodies conduct.
4. Notified bodies shall be independent of the provider of a high-risk AI system in relation to which it performs conformity assessment activities. Notified bodies shall also be independent of any other operator having an economic interest in the high-risk AI system that is assessed, as well as of any competitors of the provider.
5. Notified bodies shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the independence, objectivity and impartiality of their activities. Notified bodies shall document and implement a structure and procedures to safeguard impartiality and to promote and apply the principles of impartiality throughout their organisation, personnel and assessment activities.
6. Notified bodies shall have documented procedures in place ensuring that their personnel, committees, subsidiaries, subcontractors and any associated body or personnel of external bodies respect the confidentiality of the information in accordance with Article 70 which comes into their possession during the performance of conformity assessment activities, except when disclosure is required by law. The staff of notified bodies shall be bound to observe professional secrecy with regard to all information obtained in carrying out their tasks under this Regulation, except in relation to the notifying authorities of the Member State in which their activities are carried out.
7. Notified bodies shall have procedures for the performance of activities which take due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which it operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of the AI system in question.
8. Notified bodies shall take out appropriate liability insurance for their conformity assessment activities, unless liability is assumed by the Member State in which they are located in accordance with national law or that Member State is itself directly responsible for the conformity assessment.
9. Notified bodies shall be capable of carrying out all the tasks falling to them under this Regulation with the highest degree of professional integrity and the requisite competence in the specific field, whether those tasks are carried out by notified bodies themselves or on their behalf and under their responsibility.
10. Notified bodies shall have sufficient internal competences to be able to effectively evaluate the tasks conducted by external parties on their behalf. The notified body shall have permanent availability of sufficient administrative, technical, legal and scientific personnel who possess experience and knowledge relating to the relevant artificial intelligence technologies, data and data computing and to the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.
11. Notified bodies shall participate in coordination activities as referred to in Article 38. They shall also take part directly or be represented in European standardisation organisations, or ensure that they are aware and up to date in respect of relevant standards.
12. [deleted]

== Article 33a: Presumption of conformity with requirements relating to notified bodies
1. Where a conformity assessment body demonstrates its conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union it shall be presumed to comply with the requirements set out in Article 33 in so far as the applicable harmonised standards cover those requirements.

== Article 34: Subsidiaries of and subcontracting by notified bodies
1. Where a notified body subcontracts specific tasks connected with the conformity assessment or has recourse to a subsidiary, it shall ensure that the subcontractor or the subsidiary meets the requirements laid down in Article 33 and shall inform the notifying authority accordingly.
2. Notified bodies shall take full responsibility for the tasks performed by subcontractors or subsidiaries wherever these are established.
3. Activities may be subcontracted or carried out by a subsidiary only with the agreement of the provider.
4. The relevant documents concerning the assessment of the qualifications of the subcontractor or the subsidiary and the work carried out by them under this Regulation shall be kept at the disposal of the notifying authority for a period of 5 years from the termination date of the subcontracting activity.

== Article 34a: Operational obligations of notified bodies
1. Notified bodies shall verify the conformity of high-risk AI system in accordance with the conformity assessment procedures referred to in Article 43.
2. Notified bodies shall perform their activities while avoiding unnecessary burdens for providers, and taking due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which it operates, its structure and the degree of complexity of the high risk AI system in question. In so doing, the notified body shall nevertheless respect the degree of rigour and the level of protection required for the compliance of the high risk AI system with the requirements of this Regulation.
3. Notified bodies shall make available and submit upon request all relevant documentation, including the providers’ documentation, to the notifying authority referred to in Article 30 to allow that authority to conduct its assessment, designation, notification, monitoring activities and to facilitate the assessment outlined in this Chapter.

== Article 35: Identification numbers and lists of notified bodies designated under this Regulation
1. The Commission shall assign an identification number to notified bodies. It shall assign a single number, even where a body is notified under several Union acts.
2. The Commission shall make publicly available the list of the bodies notified under this Regulation, including the identification numbers that have been assigned to them and the activities for which they have been notified. The Commission shall ensure that the list is kept up to date.

== Article 36: Changes to notifications
1. The notifying authority shall notify the Commission and the other Member States of any relevant changes to the notification of a notified body via the electronic notification tool referred to in Article 32(2).
2. The procedures described in Article 31 and 32 shall apply to extensions of the scope of the notification. For changes to the notification other than extensions of its scope, the procedures laid down in the following paragraphs shall apply.
Where a notified body decides to cease its conformity assessment activities it shall inform the notifying authority and the providers concerned as soon as possible and in the case of a planned cessation one year before ceasing its activities. The certificates may remain valid for a temporary period of nine months after cessation of the notified body's activities on condition that another notified body has confirmed in writing that it will assume responsibilities for the AI systems covered by those certificates. The new notified body shall complete a full assessment of the AI systems affected by the end of that period before issuing new certificates for those systems. Where the notified body has ceased its activity, the notifying authority shall withdraw the designation.
3. Where a notifying authority has sufficient reasons to consider that a notified body no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 33, or that it is failing to fulfil its obligations, the notifying authority shall, provided that the the notified body had the opportunity to make its views known, restrict, suspend or withdraw notification as appropriate, depending on the seriousness of the failure to meet those requirements or fulfil those obligations. It shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States accordingly.
4. Where its designation has been suspended, restricted, or fully or partially withdrawn, the notified body shall inform the manufacturers concerned at the latest within 10 days.
5. In the event of restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a notification, the notifying authority shall take appropriate steps to ensure that the files of the notified body concerned are kept and make them available to notifying authorities in other Member States and to market surveillance authorities at their request.
6. In the event of restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a designation, the notifying authority shall:
(a) assess the impact on the certificates issued by the notified body;
(b) submit a report on its findings to the Commission and the other Member States within three months of having notified the changes to the notification;
(c) require the notified body to suspend or withdraw, within a reasonable period of time determined by the authority, any certificates which were unduly issued in order to ensure the conformity of AI systems on the market;
(d) inform the Commission and the Member States about certificates of which it has required their suspension or withdrawal;
(e) provide the national competent authorities of the Member State in which the provider has its registered place of business with all relevant information about the certificates for which it has required suspension or withdrawal. That competent authority shall take the appropriate measures, where necessary, to avoid a potential risk to health, safety or fundamental rights.
7. With the exception of certificates unduly issued, and where a notification has been suspended or restricted, the certificates shall remain valid in the following circumstances:
(a) the notifying authority has confirmed, within one month of the suspension or restriction, that there is no risk to health, safety or fundamental rights in relation to certificates affected by the suspension or restriction, and the notifying authority has outlined a timeline and actions anticipated to remedy the suspension or restriction; or
(b) the notifying authority has confirmed that no certificates relevant to the suspension will be issued, amended or re-issued during the course of the suspension or restriction, and states whether the notified body has the capability of continuing to monitor and remain responsible for existing certificates issued for the period of the suspension or restriction. In the event that the authority responsible for notified bodies determines that the notified body does not have the capability to support existing certificates issued, the provider shall provide to the national competent authorities of the Member State in which the provider of the system covered by the certificate has its registered place of business, within three months of the suspension or restriction, a written confirmation that another qualified notified body is temporarily assuming the functions of the notified body to monitor and remain responsible for the certificates during the period of suspension or restriction.
8. With the exception of certificates unduly issued, and where a designation has been withdrawn, the certificates shall remain valid for a period of nine months in the following circumstances:
(a) where the national competent authority of the Member State in which the provider of the AI system covered by the certificate has its registered place of business has confirmed that there is no risk to health, safety and fundamental rights associated with the systems in question; and
(b) another notified body has confirmed in writing that it will assume immediate responsibilities for those systems and will have completed assessment of them within twelve months of the withdrawal of the designation.
In the circumstances referred to in the first subparagraph, the national competent authority of the Member State in which the provider of the system covered by the certificate has its place of business may extend the provisional validity of the certificates for further periods of three months, which altogether shall not exceed twelve months.
The national competent authority or the notified body assuming the functions of the notified body affected by the change of notification shall immediately inform the Commission, the other Member States and the other notified bodies thereof.

== Article 37: Challenge to the competence of notified bodies
1. The Commission shall, where necessary, investigate all cases where there are reasons to doubt whether a notified body complies with the requirements laid down in Article 33.
2. The notifying authority shall provide the Commission, on request, with all relevant information relating to the notification of the notified body concerned.
3. The Commission shall ensure that all confidential information obtained in the course of its investigations pursuant to this Article is treated confidentially in accordance with Article 70.
4. Where the Commission ascertains that a notified body does not meet or no longer meets the requirements laid down in Article 33, it shall inform the notifying authority of the reasons of such an ascertainment and request it to take the necessary corrective measures, including the suspension, restriction or withdrawal of the designation if necessary. Where the notifying authority fails to take the necessary corrective measures, the Commission may, by means of implementing acts, suspend, restrict or withdraw the notification. That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2).

== Article 38: Coordination of notified bodies
1. The Commission shall ensure that, with regard to high-risk AI systems, appropriate coordination and cooperation between notified bodies active in the conformity assessment procedures pursuant to this Regulation are put in place and properly operated in the form of a sectoral group of notified bodies.
2. The notifying authority shall ensure that the bodies notified by them participate in the work of that group, directly or by means of designated representatives.

== Article 39: Conformity assessment bodies of third countries
1. Conformity assessment bodies established under the law of a third country with which the Union has concluded an agreement may be authorised to carry out the activities of notified Bodies under this Regulation, provided that they meet the requirements in Article 33.

** Chapter 5: STANDARDS, CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT, CERTIFICATES, REGISTRATION

== Article 40: Harmonised standards
1. High-risk AI systems or general purpose AI systems which are in conformity with harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title or, as applicable, with requirements set out in Article 4a and Article 4b, to the extent those standards cover those requirements.
2. When issuing a standardisation request to European standardisation organisations in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation 1025/2012, the Commission shall specify that standards are coherent, clear and drafted in such a way that they aim to fulfil in particular the following objectives:
(a) ensure that AI systems placed on the market or put into service in the Union are safe and respect Union values and strengthen the Union's open strategic autonomy;
(b) promote investment and innovation in AI, including through increasing legal certainty, as well as competitiveness and growth of the Union market;
(c) enhance multistakeholder governance, representative of all relevant European stakeholders (e.g. industry, SMEs, civil society, researchers);
(d) contribute to strengthening global cooperation on standardisation in the field of AI that is consistent with Union values and interests.
The Commission shall request the European standardisation organisations to provide evidence of their best efforts to fulfil the above objectives.

== Article 41: Common specifications
1. The Commission is empowered to adopt, after consulting the AI Board referred to in Article 56, implementing acts in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2) establishing common technical specifications for the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, or, as applicable, with requirements set out in Article 4a and Article 4b, where the following conditions have been fulfilled:
(a) no reference to harmonised standards covering the relevant essential safety or fundamental right concerns is published in the Official Journal of the European Union in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012;
(b) the Commission has requested, pursuant to Article 10(1) of Regulation 1025/2012, one or more European standardisation organisations to draft a harmonised standard for the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title;
(c) the request referred to in point (b) has not been accepted by any of the European standardisation organisations or the harmonised standards addressing that request are not delivered within the deadline set in accordance with article 10(1) of Regulation 1025/2012 or those standards do not comply with the request.
1a. Before preparing a draft implementing act, the Commission shall inform the committee referred to in Article 22 of Regulation EU (No) 1025/2012 that it considers that the conditions in paragraph 1 are fulfilled.
2. In the early preparation of the draft implementing act establishing the common specification, the Commission shall fulfil the objectives referred to in Article 40(2) and gather the views of relevant bodies or expert groups established under relevant sectorial Union law. Based on that consultation, the Commission shall prepare the draft implementing act.
3. High-risk AI systems or general purpose AI systems which are in conformity with the common specifications referred to in paragraph 1 shall be presumed to be in conformity with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title or, as applicable, with requirements set out in Article 4a and Article 4b, to the extent those common specifications cover those requirements.
4. When references of a harmonised standard are published in the Official Journal of the European Union, implementing acts referred to in paragraph 1, which cover the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title or requirements set out in Article 4a and Article 4b, shall be repealed, as applicable.
5. When a Member State considers that a common specification does not entirely satisfy the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title or requirements set out in Article 4a and Article 4b, as applicable, it shall inform the Commission thereof with a detailed explanation and the Commission shall assess that information and, if appropriate, amend the implementing act establishing the common specification in question.

== Article 42: Presumption of conformity with certain requirements
1. High-risk AI systems that have been trained and tested on data reflecting the specific geographical, behavioural or functional setting within which they are intended to be used shall be presumed to be in compliance with the respective requirements set out in Article 10(4).
2. High-risk AI systems or general purpose AI systems that have been certified or for which a statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity scheme pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the Council33 and the references of which have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to be in compliance with the cybersecurity requirements set out in Article 15 of this Regulation in so far as the cybersecurity certificate or statement of conformity or parts thereof cover those requirements.

== Article 43: Conformity assessment
1. For high-risk AI systems listed in point 1 of Annex III, where, in demonstrating the compliance of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, the provider has applied harmonised standards referred to in Article 40, or, where applicable, common specifications referred to in Article 41, the provider shall opt for one of the following procedures:
(a) the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control referred to in Annex VI; or
(b) the conformity assessment procedure based on assessment of the quality management system and assessment of the technical documentation, with the involvement of a notified body, referred to in Annex VII.
Where, in demonstrating the compliance of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, the provider has not applied or has applied only in part harmonised standards referred to in Article 40, or where such harmonised standards do not exist and common specifications referred to in Article 41 are not available, the provider shall follow the conformity assessment procedure set out in Annex VII.
For the purpose of the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex VII, the provider may choose any of the notified bodies. However, when the system is intended to be put into service by law enforcement, immigration or asylum authorities as well as EU institutions, bodies or agencies, the market surveillance authority referred to in Article 63(5) or (6), as applicable, shall act as a notified body.
2. For high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III and for general purpose AI systems referred in Title 1a, providers shall follow the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control as referred to in Annex VI, which does not provide for the involvement of a notified body.
3. For high-risk AI systems, to which legal acts listed in Annex II, section A, apply, the provider shall follow the relevant conformity assessment as required under those legal acts. The requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title shall apply to those high-risk AI systems and shall be part of that assessment. Points 4.3., 4.4., 4.5. and the fifth paragraph of point 4.6 of Annex VII shall also apply.
For the purpose of that assessment, notified bodies which have been notified under those legal acts shall be entitled to control the conformity of the high-risk AI systems with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, provided that the compliance of those notified bodies with requirements laid down in Article 33(4), (9) and (10) has been assessed in the context of the notification procedure under those legal acts.
Where the legal acts listed in Annex II, section A, enable the manufacturer of the product to opt out from a third-party conformity assessment, provided that that manufacturer has applied all harmonised standards covering all the relevant requirements, that manufacturer may make use of that option only if he has also applied harmonised standards or, where applicable, common specifications referred to in Article 41, covering the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title.
4. [deleted]
5. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 73 for the purpose of updating Annexes VI and Annex VII in light of technical progress.
6. The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts to amend paragraphs 1 and 2 in order to subject high-risk AI systems referred to in points 2 to 8 of Annex III to the conformity assessment procedure referred to in Annex VII or parts thereof. The Commission shall adopt such delegated acts taking into account the effectiveness of the conformity assessment procedure based on internal control referred to in Annex VI in preventing or minimizing the risks to health and safety and protection of fundamental rights posed by such systems as well as the availability of adequate capacities and resources among notified bodies.

== Article 44: Certificates
1. Certificates issued by notified bodies in accordance with Annex VII shall be drawn-up in a a language which can be easily undestood by the relevant authorities in the Member State in which the notified body is established.
2. Certificates shall be valid for the period they indicate, which shall not exceed five years. On application by the provider, the validity of a certificate may be extended for further periods, each not exceeding five years, based on a re-assessment in accordance with the applicable conformity assessment procedures. Any supplement to a certificate shall remain valid as long as the certificate which it supplements is valid.
3. Where a notified body finds that an AI system no longer meets the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title, it shall, taking account of the principle of proportionality, suspend or withdraw the certificate issued or impose any restrictions on it, unless compliance with those requirements is ensured by appropriate corrective action taken by the provider of the system within an appropriate deadline set by the notified body. The notified body shall give reasons for its decision.

== Article 45: Appeal against decisions of notified bodies
1. An appeal procedure against decisions of the notified bodies shall be available.

== Article 46: Information obligations of notified bodies
1. Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the following:
(a) any Union technical documentation assessment certificates, any supplements to those certificates, quality management system approvals issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII;
(b) any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a Union technical documentation assessment certificate or a quality management system approval issued in accordance with the requirements of Annex VII;
(c) any circumstances affecting the scope of or conditions for notification;
(d) any request for information which they have received from market surveillance authorities regarding conformity assessment activities;
(e) on request, conformity assessment activities performed within the scope of their notification and any other activity performed, including cross-border activities and subcontracting.
2. Each notified body shall inform the other notified bodies of:
(a) quality management system approvals which it has refused, suspended or withdrawn, and, upon request, of quality system approvals which it has issued;
(b) EU technical documentation assessment certificates or any supplements thereto which it has refused, withdrawn, suspended or otherwise restricted, and, upon request, of the certificates and/or supplements thereto which it has issued.
3. Each notified body shall provide the other notified bodies carrying out similar conformity assessment activities covering the same AI systems with relevant information on issues relating to negative and, on request, positive conformity assessment results.
4. The obligations referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 shall be complied with in accordance with Article 70.

== Article 47: Derogation from conformity assessment procedure
1. By way of derogation from Article 43 and upon a duly justified request, any market surveillance authority may authorise the placing on the market or putting into service of specific high-risk AI systems within the territory of the Member State concerned, for exceptional reasons of public security or the protection of life and health of persons, environmental protection and the protection of key industrial and infrastructural assets. That authorisation shall be for a limited period of time while the necessary conformity assessment procedures are being carried out, taking into account the exceptional reasons justifying the derogation. The completion of those procedures shall be undertaken without undue delay.
1a. In a duly justified situation of urgency for exceptional reasons of public security or in case of specific, substantial and imminent threat to the life or physical safety of natural persons, law enforcement authorities or civil protection authorities may put a specific high-risk AI system into service without the authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 provided that such authorisation is requested during or after the use without undue delay, and if such authorisation is rejected, its use shall be stopped with immediate effect and all the results and outputs of this use shall be immediately discarded.
2. The authorisation referred to in paragraph 1 shall be issued only if the market surveillance authority concludes that the high-risk AI system complies with the requirements of Chapter 2 of this Title. The market surveillance authority shall inform the Commission and the other Member States of any authorisation issued pursuant to paragraph 1. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement authorities.
3. [deleted]
4. [deleted]
5. [deleted]
6. For high-risk AI systems related to products covered by Union harmonisation legislation referred to in Annex II Section A, only the conformity assessment derogation procedures established in that legislation shall apply.

== Article 48: EU declaration of conformity
1. The provider shall draw up a written or electronically signed EU declaration of conformity for each AI system and keep it at the disposal of the national competent authorities for 10 years after the AI system has been placed on the market or put into service. The EU declaration of conformity shall identify the AI system for which it has been drawn up. A copy of the EU declaration of conformity shall be submitted to the relevant national competent authorities upon request.
2. The EU declaration of conformity shall state that the high-risk AI system in question meets the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title. The EU declaration of conformity shall contain the information set out in Annex V and shall be translated into a language that can be easily understood by the national competent authorities of the Member State(s) in which the high-risk AI system is made available.
3. Where high-risk AI systems are subject to other Union harmonisation legislation which also requires an EU declaration of conformity, a single EU declaration of conformity shall be drawn up in respect of all Union legislations applicable to the high-risk AI system. The declaration shall contain all the information required for identification of the Union harmonisation legislation to which the declaration relates.
4. By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the provider shall assume responsibility for compliance with the requirements set out in Chapter 2 of this Title. The provider shall keep the EU declaration of conformity up-to-date as appropriate.
5. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 73 for the purpose of updating the content of the EU declaration of conformity set out in Annex V in order to introduce elements that become necessary in light of technical progress.

== Article 49: CE marking of conformity
1. The CE marking of conformity shall be subject to the general principles set out in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.
2. The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly for high-risk AI systems. Where that is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature of the high-risk AI system, it shall be affixed to the packaging or to the accompanying documentation, as appropriate.
3. Where applicable, the CE marking shall be followed by the identification number of the notified body responsible for the conformity assessment procedures set out in Article 43. The identification number shall also be indicated in any promotional material which mentions that the high-risk AI system fulfils the requirements for CE marking.

== Article 50: [deleted]

== Article 51: Registration of relevant operators and of high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III
1. Before placing on the market or putting into service a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III with the exception of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III, points 1, 6 and 7 in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, and high risk AI systems referred to in Annex III point 2, the provider and where applicable, the authorised representative shall register themselves in the EU database referred to in Article 60. The provider or, where applicable the authorised representative, shall also register their systems in that database.
2. Before using a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III, users of high-risk AI systems that are public authorities, agencies or bodies, or entities acting on their behalf, shall register themselves in the EU database referred to in Article 60 and select the system that they envisage to use.
The obligations laid down in the previous subparagraph shall not apply to law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities, agencies or bodies and authorities, agencies or bodies using high-risk AI systems referred to Annex III point 2, as well as to entities acting on their behalf.

## TITLE IV:TRANSPARENCY OBLIGATIONS FOR PROVIDERS AND USERS OF CERTAIN AI SYSTEMS

== Article 52: Transparency obligations for providers and users of certain AI systems
1. Providers shall ensure that AI systems intended to interact with natural persons are designed and developed in such a way that natural persons are informed that they are interacting with an AI system, unless this is obvious from the point of view of a natural person who is reasonably well-informed, observant and circumspect, taking into account the circumstances and the context of use. This obligation shall not apply to AI systems authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate and prosecute criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of third parties, unless those systems are available for the public to report a criminal offence.
2. Users of a biometric categorisation system shall inform of the operation of the system the natural persons exposed thereto. This obligation shall not apply to AI systems used for biometric categorisation, which are permitted by law to detect, prevent and investigate criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of third parties.
2a. Users of an emotion recognition system shall inform of the operation of the system the natural persons exposed thereto. This obligation shall not apply to AI systems used for emotion recognition which are permitted by law to detect, prevent and investigate criminal offences, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of third parties.
3. Users of an AI system that generates or manipulates image, audio or video content that appreciably resembles existing persons, objects, places or other entities or events and would falsely appear to a person to be authentic or truthful (‘deep fake’), shall disclose that the content has been artificially generated or manipulated.
However, the first subparagraph shall not apply where the use is authorised by law to detect, prevent, investigate and prosecute criminal offences or where the content is part of an evidently creative, satirical, artistic or fictional work or programme subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and freedoms of third parties.
3a. The information referred to in paragraphs 1 to 3 shall be provided to natural persons in a clear and distinguishable manner at the latest at the time of the first interaction or exposure.
4. Paragraphs 1, 2, 2a and 3 and 3a shall not affect the requirements and obligations set out in Title III of this Regulation and shall be without prejudice to other transparency obligations for users of AI systems laid down in Union or national law.

## TITLE V:MEASURES IN SUPPORT OF INNOVATION

== Article 53: AI regulatory sandboxes
-1a. National competent authorities may establish AI regulatory sandboxes for the development, training, testing and validation of innovative AI systems under the direct supervision, guidance and support by the national competent authority, before those systems are placed on the market or put into service. Such regulatory sandboxes may include testing in real world conditions supervised by the national competent authorities.
-1b. [deleted]
-1c Where appropriate, national competent authorities shall cooperate with other relevant authorities and may allow for the involvement of other actors within the AI ecosystem.
-1d. This Article shall not affect other regulatory sandboxes established under national or Union law, including in cases where the products or services that are tested in them are linked to the use of innovative AI systems. Member States shall ensure an appropriate level of cooperation between the authorities supervising those other sandboxes and the national competent authorities.
1. [deleted]
1a. [deleted]
1b. The establishment of AI regulatory sandboxes under this Regulation shall aim to contribute to one or more of the following objectives:
(a) foster innovation and competitiveness and facilitate the development of an AI ecosystem;
(b) facilitate and accelerate access to the Union market for AI systems, in particular when provided by small and medium enterprises (SMEs), including start-ups;
(c) improve legal certainty and contribute to the sharing of best practices through cooperation with the authorities involved in the AI regulatory sandbox with a view to ensuring future compliance with this Regulation and, where appropriate, with other Union and Member States legislation;
(d) contribute to evidence-based regulatory learning.
2. [deleted]
2a. Access to the AI regulatory sandboxes shall be open to any provider or prospective provider of an AI system who fulfils the eligibility and selection criteria referred to in paragraph 6(a) and who has been selected by the national competent authorities following the selection procedure referred to in paragraph 6(b). Providers or prospective providers may also submit applications in partnership with users or any other relevant third parties.
Participation in the AI regulatory sandbox shall be limited to a period that is appropriate to the complexity and scale of the project. This period may be extended by the national competent authority.
Participation in the AI regulatory sandbox shall be based on a specific plan referred to in paragraph 6 of this Article that shall be agreed between the participant(s) and the national competent authoritie(s), as applicable.
3. The participation in the AI regulatory sandboxes shall not affect the supervisory and corrective powers of the authorities supervising the sandbox. Those authorities shall exercice their supervisory powers in a flexible manner within the limits of the relevant legislation, using their discretionary powers when implementing legal provisions to a specific AI sandbox project, with the objective of supporting innovation in AI in the Union.
Provided that the participant(s) respect the sandbox plan and the terms and conditions for their participation as referred to in paragraph 6(c) and follow in good faith the guidance given by the authorities, no administrative fines shall be imposed by the authorities for infringement of applicable Union or Member State legislation relating to the AI system supervised in the sandbox, including the provisions of this Regulation.
4. The participants remain liable under applicable Union and Member States liability legislation for any damage caused in the course of their participation in an AI regulatory sandbox.
4a. Upon request of the provider or prospective provider of the AI system, the national competent authority shall provide, where applicable, a written proof of the activities successfully carried out in the sandbox. The national competent authority shall also provide an exit report detailing the activities carried out in the sandbox and the related results and learning outcomes. Such written proof and exit report could be taken into account by market surveillance authorities or notified bodies, as applicable, in the context of conformity assessment procedures or market surveillance checks.
Subject to the confidentiality provisions in Article 70 and with the agreement of the sandbox participants, the European Commission and the AI Board shall be authorised to access the exit reports and shall take them into account, as appropriate, when exercising their tasks under this Regulation. If both the participant and the national competent authority explicitly agree to this, the exit report can be made publicly available through the single information platform referred to in article 55(3)(b).
4b. The AI regulatory sandboxes shall be designed and implemented in such a way that, where relevant, they facilitate cross-border cooperation between the national competent authorities.
5. National competent authorities shall make publicly available annual reports on the implementation of the AI regulatory sandboxes, including good practices, lessons learnt and recommendations on their setup and, where relevant, on the application of this Regulation and other Union legislation supervised within the sandbox. Those annual reports shall be submitted to the AI Board which shall make publicly available a summary of all good practices, lessons learnt and recommendations. This obligation to make annual reports publicly available shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities. The Commission and the AI Board shall, where appropriate, take the annual reports into account when exercising their tasks under this Regulation.
5b. The Commission shall ensure that information about AI regulatory sandboxes, including about those established under this Article, is available through the single information platform referred to in Article 55(3)(b).
6. The modalities and the conditions for the establishment and operation of the AI regulatory sandboxes under this Regulation shall be adopted through implementing acts in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2).
The modalities and conditions shall to the best extent possible support flexibility for national competent authorities to establish and operate their AI regulatory sandboxes, foster innovation and regulatory learning and shall particularly take into account the special circumstances and capacities of participating SMEs, including start-ups.
Those implementing acts shall include common main principles on the following issues:
(a) eligibility and selection for participation in the AI regulatory sandbox;
(b) procedure for the application, participation, monitoring, exiting from and termination of the AI regulatory sandbox, including the sandbox plan and the exit report;
(c) the terms and conditions applicable to the participants.
7. When national competent authorities consider authorising testing in real world conditions supervised within the framework of an AI regulatory sandbox established under this Article, they shall specifically agree with the participants on the terms and conditions of such testing and in particular on the appropriate safeguards with the view to protect fundamental rights, health and safety. Where appropriate, they shall cooperate with other national competent authorities with a view to ensure consistent practices across the Union.

== Article 54: Further processing of personal data for developing certain AI systems in the public interest in the AI regulatory sandbox
1. In the AI regulatory sandbox personal data lawfully collected for other purposes may be processed for the purposes of developing, testing and training of innovative AI systems in the sandbox under the following cumulative conditions:
(a) the innovative AI systems shall be developed for safeguarding substantial public interest by a public authority or another natural or legal person governed by public law or by private law and in one or more of the following areas:
(i) [deleted]
(ii) public safety and health, including prevention, control and treatment of disease and improvement of health care systems;
(iii) protection and improvement of the quality of the environment, including green transition, climate change mitigation and adaptation;
(iv) energy sustainability, transport and mobility;
(v) efficiency and quality of public administration and public services;
(vi) cybersecurity and resilience of critical infrastructure.
(b) the data processed are necessary for complying with one or more of the requirements referred to in Title III, Chapter 2 where those requirements cannot be effectively fulfilled by processing anonymised, synthetic or other non-personal data;
(c) there are effective monitoring mechanisms to identify if any high risks to the rights and freedoms of the data subjects, as referred to in Article 35 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and in Article 39 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, may arise during the sandbox experimentation as well as response mechanism to promptly mitigate those risks and, where necessary, stop the processing;
(d) any personal data to be processed in the context of the sandbox are in a functionally separate, isolated and protected data processing environment under the control of the participants and only authorised persons have access to that data;
(e) any personal data processed are not to be transmitted, transferred or otherwise accessed by other parties that are not participants in the sandbox, unless such disclosure occurs in compliance with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 or, where applicable, Regulation 2018/725, and all participants have agreed to it;
(f) any processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox shall not affect the application of the rights of the data subjects as provided for under Union law on the protection of personal data, in particular in Article 22 of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 24 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725;
(g) any personal data processed in the context of the sandbox are protected by means of appropriate technical and organisational measures and deleted once the participation in the sandbox has terminated or the personal data has reached the end of its retention period;
(h) the logs of the processing of personal data in the context of the sandbox are kept for the duration of the participation in the sandbox, unless provided otherwise by Union or national law;
(i) complete and detailed description of the process and rationale behind the training, testing and validation of the AI system is kept together with the testing results as part of the technical documentation in Annex IV;
(j) a short summary of the AI project developed in the sandbox, its objectives and expected results published on the website of the competent authorities. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities.
1a. For the purpose of prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, including the safeguarding against and the prevention of threats to public security, under the control and responsibility of law enforcement authorities, the processing of personal data in AI regulatory sandboxes shall be based on a specific Member State or Union law and subject to the same cumulative conditions as referred to in paragraph 1.
2. Paragraph 1 is without prejudice to Union or Member States laws laying down the basis for the processing of personal data which is necessary for the purpose of developing, testing and training of innovative AI systems or any other legal basis, in compliance with Union law on the protection of personal data.

== Article 54a: Testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes
1. Testing of AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes may be conducted by providers or prospective providers of high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III, in accordance with the provisions of this Article and the real-world testing plan referred to in this Article.
The detailed elements of the real-world testing plan shall be specified in implementing acts adopted by the Commission in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 74(2).
This provision shall be without prejudice to Union or Member State legislation for the testing in real world conditions of high-risk AI systems related to products covered by legislation listed in Annex II.
2. Providers or prospective providers may conduct testing of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III in real world conditions at any time before the placing on the market or putting into service of the AI system on their own or in partnership with one or more prospective users.
3. The testing of high-risk AI systems in real world conditions under this Article shall be without prejudice to ethical review that may be required by national or Union law.
4. Providers or prospective providers may conduct the testing in real world conditions only where all of the following conditions are met:
(a) the provider or prospective provider has drawn up a real-world testing plan and submitted it to the market surveillance authority in the Member State(s) where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted;
(b) the market surveillance authority in the Member State(s) where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted have not objected to the testing within 30 days after its submission;
(c) the provider or prospective provider with the exception of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III, points 1, 6 and 7 in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control management, and high risk AI systems referred to in Annex III point 2, has registered the testing in real world conditions in the EU database referred to in Article 60(5a) with a Union-wide unique single identification number and the information specified in Annex VIIIa;
(d) the provider or prospective provider conducting the testing in real world conditions is established in the Union or it has appointed a legal representative for the purpose of the testing in real world conditions who is established in the Union;
(e) data collected and processed for the purpose of the testing in real world conditions shall not be transferred to countries outside the Union, unless the transfer and the processing provides equivalent safeguards to those provided under Union law;
(f) the testing in real world conditions does not last longer than necessary to achieve its objectives and in any case not longer than 12 months;
(g) persons belonging to vulnerable groups due to their age, physical or mental disability are appropriately protected;
(h) [deleted]
(i) where a provider or prospective provider organises the testing in real world conditions in cooperation with one or more prospective users, the latter have been informed of all aspects of the testing that are relevant to their decision to participate, and given the relevant instructions on how to use the AI system referred to in Article 13; the provider or prospective provider and the user(s) shall conclude an agreement specifying their roles and responsibilities with a view to ensuring compliance with the provisions for testing in real world conditions under this Regulation and other applicable Union and Member States legislation;
(j) the subjects of the testing in real world conditions have given informed consent in accordance with Article 54b, or in the case of law enforcement, where the seeking of informed consent would prevent the AI system from being tested, the testing itself and the outcome of the testing in the real world conditions shall not have a negative effect on the subject;
(k) the testing in real world conditions is effectively overseen by the provider or prospective provider and user(s) with persons who are suitably qualified in the relevant field and have the necessary capacity, training and authority to perform their tasks;
(l) the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system can be effectively reversed or disregarded.
5. Any subject of the testing in real world conditions, or his or her legally designated representative, as appropriate, may, without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification, withdraw from the testing at any time by revoking his or her informed consent. The withdrawal of the informed consent shall not affect the activities already carried out and the use of data obtained based on the informed consent before its withdrawal.
6. Any serious incident identified in the course of the testing in real world conditions shall be reported to the national market surveillance authority in accordance with Article 62 of this Regulation. The provider or prospective provider shall adopt immediate mitigation measures or, failing that, suspend the testing in real world conditions until such mitigation takes place or otherwise terminate it. The provider or prospective provider shall establish a procedure for the prompt recall of the AI system upon such termination of the testing in real world conditions.
7. Providers or prospective providers shall notify the national market surveillance authority in the Member State(s) where the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted of the suspension or termination of the testing in real world conditions and the final outcomes.
8. The provider and prospective provider shall be liable under applicable Union and Member States liability legislation for any damage caused in the course of their participation in the testing in real world conditions.

== Article 54b: Informed consent to participate in testing in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes
1. For the purpose of testing in real world conditions under Article 54a, informed consent shall be freely given by the subject of testing prior to his or her participation in such testing and after having been duly informed with concise, clear, relevant, and understandable information regarding:
(i) the nature and objectives of the testing in real world conditions and the possible inconvenience that may be linked to his or her participation;
(ii) the conditions under which the testing in real world conditions is to be conducted, including the expected duration of the subject's participation;
(iii) the subject's rights and guarantees regarding participation, in particular his or her right to refuse to participate in and the right to withdraw from testing in real world conditions at any time without any resulting detriment and without having to provide any justification;
(iv) the modalities for requesting the reversal or the disregard of the predictions, recommendations or decisions of the AI system;
(v) the Union-wide unique single identification number of the testing in real world conditions in accordance with Article 54a(4c) and the contact details of the provider or its legal representative from whom further information can be obtained.
2. The informed consent shall be dated and documented and a copy shall be given to the subject or his or her legal representative.

== Article 55: Support measures for operators, in particular SMEs, including start-ups
1. Member States shall undertake the following actions:
(a) provide SMEs, including start-ups, with priority access to the AI regulatory sandboxes to the extent that they fulfil the eligibility and selection criteria;
(b) organise specific awareness raising and training activities about the application of this Regulation tailored to the needs of the SMEs, including start-ups, and, as appropriate, local public authorities;
(c) where appropriate, establish a dedicated channel for communication with SMEs, including start-ups and, as appropriate, local public authorities to provide advice and respond to queries about the implementation of this Regulation, including as regards participation in AI regulatory sandboxes.
2. The specific interests and needs of the SME providers, including start-ups, shall be taken into account when setting the fees for conformity assessment under Article 43, reducing those fees proportionately to their size, market size and other relevant indicators.
3. The Commission shall undertake the following actions:
(a) upon request of the AI Board, provide standardised templates for the areas covered by this Regulation;
(b) develop and maintain a single information platform providing easy to use information in relation to this Regulation for all operators across the Union;
(c) organise appropriate communication campaigns to raise awareness about the obligations arising from this Regulation;
(d) evaluate and promote the convergence of best practices in public procurement procedures in relation to AI systems.

== Article 55a: Derogations for specific operators
1. The obligations laid down in Article 17 of this Regulation shall not apply to microenterprises as defined in Article 2(3) of the Annex to the Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, provided those enterprises do not have partner enterprises or linked enterprises as defined in Article 3 of the same Annex.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not be interpreted as exempting those operators from fulfilling any other requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, including those established in Articles 9, 61 and 62.
3. Requirements and obligations for general purpose AI systems laid down in Article 4b shall not apply to micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, provided those enterprises do not have partner enterprises or linked enterprises as defined in Article 3 of the the Annex to the Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises.

## TITLE VI:GOVERNANCE

** Chapter 1: EUROPEAN ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE BOARD

== Article 56: Establishment and structure of the European Artificial Intelligence Board
1. A ‘European Artificial Intelligence Board’ (the ‘Board’) is established.
2. The Board shall be composed of one representative per Member State. The European Data Protection Supervisor shall participate as an observer. The Commission shall also attend the Board’s meetings without taking part in the votes.
Other national and Union authorities, bodies or experts may be invited to the meetings by the Board on a case by case basis, where the issues discussed are of relevance for them.
2a. Each representative shall be designated by their Member State for a period of 3 years, renewable once.
2aa. Member States shall ensure that their representatives in the Board:
(i) have the relevant competences and powers in their Member State so as to contribute actively to the achievement of the board’s tasks referred to in Article 58;
(ii) are designated as a single contact point vis-à-vis the Board and, where appropriate, taking into account Member States’ needs, as a single contact point for stakeholders;
(iii) are empowered to facilitate consistency and coordination between national competent authorities in their Member State as regards the implementation of this Regulation, including through the collection of relevant data and information for the purpose of fulfilling their tasks on the Board.
3. The designated representatives of the Member States shall adopt the Board’s rules of procedure by a two-thirds majority.
The rules of procedure shall, in particular, lay down procedures for the selection process, duration of mandate and specifications of the tasks of the Chair, the voting modalities, and the organisation of the Board’s activities and its sub-groups.
The Board shall establish a standing subgroup serving as a platform for stakeholders to advise the Board on all issues related to the implementation of this Regulation, including on the preparation of implementing and delegated acts. To this purpose, organisations representing the interests of the providers and users of AI systems, including SMEs and start-ups, as well as civil society organisations, representatives of affected persons, researchers, standardisation organisations, notified bodies, laboratories and testing and experimentation facilities shall be invited to participate to this sub-group. The Board shall establish two standing sub-groups to provide a platform for cooperation and exchange among market surveillance authorities and notifying authorities on issues related to market surveillance and notified bodies respectively.
The Board may establish other standing or temporary sub-groups as appropriate for the purpose of examining specific issues. Where appropriate, stakeholders referred to in the previous subparagraph may be invited to such sub-groups or to specific meetings of those subgroups in the capacity of observers.
3a. The Board shall be organised and operated so as to safeguard the objectivity and impartiality of its activities.
4. The Board shall be chaired by one of the representatives of the Member States. Upon request of the Chair, the Commission shall convene the meetings and prepare the agenda in accordance with the tasks of the Board pursuant to this Regulation and its rules of procedure. The Commission shall provide administrative and analytical support for the activities of the Board pursuant to this Regulation.

== Article 57: [deleted]

== Article 58: Tasks of the Board
1. The Board shall advice and assist the Commission and the Member States in order to facilitate the consistent and effective application of this Regulation. For this purpose the Board may in particular:
(a) collect and share technical and regulatory expertise and best practices among Member States;
(b) contribute to the harmonisation of administrative practices in the Member States, including in relation to the derogation from the conformity assessment procedures referred to in Article 47, the functioning of regulatory sandboxes and testing in real world conditions referred to in Article 53, 54 and 54a;
(c) upon the request of the Commission or on its own initiative, issue recommendations and written opinions on any relevant matters related to the implementation of this Regulation and to its consistent and effective application, including:
(i) on technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2,
(ii) on the use of harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41,
(iii) on the preparation of guidance documents, including the guidelines concerning the setting of administrative fines referred to in Article 71;
(d) advise the Commission on the potential need for amendment of Annex III in accordance with Articles 4 and 7, taking into account relevant available evidence and the latest develoments in technology;
(e) advise the Commission during the preparation of delegated or implementing act pursuant to this Regulation;
(f) cooperate, as appropriate, with relevant EU bodies, experts groups and networks in particular in the fields of product safety, cybersecurity, competition, digital and media services, financial services, cryptocurrencies, consumer protection, data and fundamental rights protection;
(g) contribute and provide relevant advice to the Commission in the development of the guidance referred to in Article 58a or request the development of such guidance;
(h) to assist the work of market surveillance authorities and, in cooperation and subject to agreement of the concerned market surveillance authorities, promote and support cross-border market surveillance investigations, including with respect to the emergence of risks of systemic nature that may stem from AI systems;
(i) contribute to the assessment of training needs for staff of Member States involved in implementing this Regulation;
(j) advise the Commission in relation to international matters on artificial intelligence.

** Chapter 1a: GUIDELINES FROM THE COMMISSION

== Article 58a: Guidelines from the Commission on the implementation of this Regulation
1. Upon the request of the Member States or the Board, or on its own initiative, the Commission shall issue guidelines on the practical implementation of this Regulation, and in particular on
(i) the application of the requirements referred to in Articles 8 - 15;
(ii) the prohibited practices referred to in Article 5;
(iii) the practical implementation of the provisions related to substantial modification;
(iv) the practical implementation of uniform conditions referred to in Article 6, paragraph 3, including examples in relation to high risk AI systems referred to in Annex III;
(v) the practical implementation of transparency obligations laid down in Article 52;
(vi) the relationship of this Regulation with other relevant Union legislation, including as regards consistency in their enforcement.
When issuing such guidelines, the Commission shall pay particular attention to the needs of SMEs including start-ups, local public authorities and sectors most likely to be affected by this Regulation.

** Chapter 2: NATIONAL COMPETENT AUTHORITIES

== Article 59: Designation of national competent authorities
1. [deleted]
2. Each Member State shall establish or designate at least one notifying authority and at least one market surveillance authority for the purpose of this Regulation as national competent authorities. These national competent authorities shall be organised so as to safeguard the priniciples of objectivity and impartiality of their activities and tasks. Provided that those prinicples are respected, such activities and tasks may be performed by one or several designated authorities, in accordance with the organisational needs of the Member State.
3. Member States shall inform the Commission of their designation or designations.
4. Member States shall ensure that national competent authorities are provided with adequate financial resources, technical equipment and well qualified human resources to effectively fulfil their tasks under this Regulation.
5. By [one year after entry into force of this Regulation] and afterwards six months before the deadline referred to in Article 84(2) Member States shall inform the Commission on the status of the financial resources, technical equipment and human resources of the national competent authorities with an assessment of their adequacy. The Commission shall transmit that information to the Board for discussion and possible recommendations.
6. The Commission shall facilitate the exchange of experience between national competent authorities.
7. National competent authorities may provide advice on the implementation of this Regulation, including tailored to SME providers, including start-ups. Whenever national competent authorities intend to provide guidance and advice with regard to an AI system in areas covered by other Union legislation, the competent national authorities under that Union legislation shall be consulted, as appropriate. Member States may also establish one central contact point for communication with operators.
8. When Union institutions, agencies and bodies fall within the scope of this Regulation, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall act as the competent authority for their supervision.

## TITLE VII:EU DATABASE FOR HIGH-RISK AI SYSTEMS LISTED IN ANNEX III

== Article 60: EU database for high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III
1. The Commission shall, in collaboration with the Member States, set up and maintain a EU database containing information referred to in paragraph 2 concerning relevant operators and high-risk AI systems listed in Annex III which are registered in accordance with Articles 51 and 54a. When setting the fuctional specifications of such database, the Commission shall consult the AI Board.
2. The data listed in Annex VIII, Part I, shall be entered into the EU database by the providers, authorised representatives and relevant users, as applicable, upon their registration. The data listed in Annex VIII, Part II, 1 to 11, shall be entered into the EU database by the providers, or where applicable by the authorised representative, in accordance with Article 51. The data referred in Annex VIII, Part II, 12 shall be automatically generated by the database based on the information provided by relevant users pursuant to Article 51(2). The data listed in Annex VIIIa shall be entered into the database by the prospective providers or providers in accordance with Article 54a.
3. [deleted]
4. The EU database shall contain no personal data, except for the information listed in Annex VIII, and shall be without prejudice to Article 70.
5. The Commission shall be the controller of the EU database. It shall make available to providers, prospective providers and users adequate technical and administrative support.
5a. Information contained in the EU database registered in accordance with Article 51 shall be accessible to the public. The information registered in accordance with Article 54a shall be accessible only to market surveillance authorites and the Commission, unless the prospective provider or provider has given consent for making this information also accessible the public.

## TITLE VIII:POST-MARKET MONITORING,INFORMATION SHARING, MARKET SURVEILLANCE

** Chapter 1: POST-MARKET MONITORING

== Article 61: Post-market monitoring by providers and post-market monitoring plan for high-risk AI systems
1. Providers shall establish and document a post-market monitoring system in a manner that is proportionate to the risks of the high-risk AI system.
2. In order to allow the provider to evaluate the compliance of AI systems with the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 throughout their life cycle, the post-market monitoring system shall collect, document and analyse relevant data, which may be provided by users or which may be collected through other sources on the performance of high-risk AI systems. This obligation shall not cover sensitive operational data of users of AI systems which are law enforcement authorities.
3. The post-market monitoring system shall be based on a post-market monitoring plan. The post-market monitoring plan shall be part of the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV. The Commission shall adopt an implementing act laying down detailed provisions establishing a template for the post-market monitoring plan and the list of elements to be included in the plan.
4. For high-risk AI systems covered by the legal acts referred to in Annex II, Section A, where a post-market monitoring system and plan is already established under that legislation, the post-market monitoring documentation as prepared under that legislation shall be deemed sufficient, provided that the template referred to paragraph 3 is used.
The first subparagraph shall also apply high-risk AI systems referred to in point 5 of Annex III placed on the market or put into service by financial institutions that are subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation.

** Chapter 2: SHARING OF INFORMATION ON SERIOUS INCIDENTS

== Article 62: Reporting of serious incidents
1. Providers of high-risk AI systems placed on the Union market shall report any serious incident to the market surveillance authorities of the Member States where that incident occurred.
Such notification shall be made immediately after the provider has established a causal link between the AI system and the serious incident or the reasonable likelihood of such a link, and, in any event, not later than 15 days after the providers becomes aware of the serious incident.
2. Upon receiving a notification related to a serious incident referred to in Article 3(44)(c), the relevant market surveillance authority shall inform the national public authorities or bodies referred to in Article 64(3). The Commission shall develop dedicated guidance to facilitate compliance with the obligations set out in paragraph 1. That guidance shall be issued 12 months after the entry into force of this Regulation, at the latest.
3. For high-risk AI systems referred to in point 5 of Annex III which are placed on the market or put into service by providers that are financial institutions that are subject to requirements regarding their internal governance, arrangements or processes under Union financial services legislation, the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to those referred to in Article 3(44)(c).
4. For high-risk AI systems which are safety components of devices, or are themselves devices, covered by Regulation (EU) 2017/745 and Regulation (EU) 2017/746 the notification of serious incidents shall be limited to those referred to in Article 3(44)(c) and be made to the national competent authority chosen for this purpose by the Member States where that incident occurred.

** Chapter 3: ENFORCEMENT

== Article 63: Market surveillance and control of AI systems in the Union market
1. Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to AI systems covered by this Regulation. However, for the purpose of the effective enforcement of this Regulation:
(a) any reference to an economic operator under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all operators identified in Article 2 of this Regulation;
(b) any reference to a product under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall be understood as including all AI systems falling within the scope of this Regulation.
2. As part of their reporting obligations under Article 34(4) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, the market surveillance authorities shall report to the Commission about the outcomes of relevant market surveillance activities under this Regulation.
3. For high-risk AI systems, related to products to which legal acts listed in Annex II, section A apply, the market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation shall be the authority responsible for market surveillance activities designated under those legal acts or, in justified circumstances and provided that coordination is ensured, another relevant authority identified by the Member State.
The procedures referred to in Articles 65, 66, 67 and 68 of this Regulation shall not apply to AI systems related to products, to which legal acts listed in Annex II, section A apply, when such legal acts already provide for procedures having the same objective. In such a case, these sectoral procedures shall apply instead.
4. For high-risk AI systems placed on the market, put into service or used by financial institutions regulated by Union legislation on financial services, the market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation shall be the relevant national authority responsible for the financial supervision of those institutions under that legislation in so far as the placement on the market, putting into service or the use of the AI system is in direct connection with the provision of those financial services.
By way of a derogation from the previous subparagraph, in justified circumstances and provided that coordination is ensured, another relevant authority may be identified by the Member State as market surveillance authority for the purposes of this Regulation.
National market surveillance authorities supervising regulated credit institutions regulated under Directive 2013/36/EU, which are participating in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) established by Council Regulation No 1204/2013, should report, without delay, to the European Central Bank any information identified in the course of their market surveillance activities that may be of potential interest for the European Central Bank’s prudential supervisory tasks as specified in that Regulation.
5. For high-risk AI systems listed in point 1(a) in so far as the systems are used for law enforcement purposes, points 6, 7 and 8 of Annex III, Member States shall designate as market surveillance authorities for the purposes of this Regulation either the national authorities supervising the activities of the law enforcement, border control, immigration, asylum or judicial authorities, or the competent data protection supervisory authorities under Directive (EU) 2016/680, or Regulation 2016/679. Market surveillance activities shall in no way affect the independence of judicial authorities or otherwise interfere with their activities when acting in their judicial capacity.
6. Where Union institutions, agencies and bodies fall within the scope of this Regulation, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall act as their market surveillance authority.
7. Member States shall facilitate the coordination between market surveillance authorities designated under this Regulation and other relevant national authorities or bodies which supervise the application of Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex II or other Union legislation that might be relevant for the high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III.
8. Without prejudice to powers provided under Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, and where relevant and limited to what is necessary to fulfil their tasks, the market surveillance authorities shall be granted full access by the provider to the documentation as well as the training, validation and testing datasets used for the development of the high-risk AI system, including, where appropriate and subject to security safeguards, through application programming interfaces (‘API’) or other relevant technical means and tools enabling remote access.
9. Market surveillance authorities shall be granted access to the source code of the high-risk AI system upon a reasoned request and only when the following cumulative conditions are fulfilled:
(a) Access to source code is necessary to assess the conformity of a high-risk AI system with the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2, and
(b) testing/auditing procedures and verifications based on the data and documentation provided by the provider have been exhausted or proved insufficient.
10. Any information and documentation obtained by market surveillance authorities shall be treated in compliance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Article 70.
11. Complaints to the relevant market surveillance authority can be submitted by any natural or legal person having grounds to consider that there has been an infringement of the provisions of this Regulation.
In accordance with Article 11(3)(e) and (7)(a) of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, complaints shall be taken into account for the purpose of conducting the market surveillance activities and be handled in line with the dedicated procedures established therefore by the market surveillance authorities.

== Article 63a: Supervision of testing in real world conditions by market surveillance authorities
1. Market surveillance authorities shall have the competence and powers to ensure that testing in real world conditions is in accordance with this Regulation.
2. Where testing in real world conditions is conducted for AI systems that are supervised within an AI regulatory sandbox under Article 54, the market surveillance authorities shall verify the compliance with the provisions of Article 54a as part of their supervisory role for the AI regulatory sandbox. Those authorities may, as appropriate, allow the testing in real world conditions to be conducted by the provider or prospective provider in derogation to the conditions set out in Article 54a(4) (f) and (g).
3. Where a market surveillance authority has been informed by the prospective provider, the provider or any third party of a serious incident or has other grounds for considering that the conditions set out in Articles 54a and 54b are not met, it may take any of the following decisions on its territory, as appropriate:
(a) suspend or terminate the testing in real world conditions;
(b) require the provider or prospective provider and user(s) to modify any aspect of the testing in real world conditions.
4. Where a market surveillance authority has taken a decision referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article or has issued an objection within the meaning of Article 54a(4)(b), the decision or the objection shall indicate the grounds thereof and the modalities and conditions for the provider or prospective provider to challenge the decision or objection.
5. Where applicable, where a market surveillance authority has taken a decision referred to in paragraph 3 of this Article, it shall communicate the grounds therefor to the market surveillance authorities of the other Member States in which the AI system has been tested in accordance with the testing plan.

== Article 64: Powers of authorities protecting fundamental rights
1. [deleted]
2. [deleted]
3. National public authorities or bodies which supervise or enforce the respect of obligations under Union law protecting fundamental rights, including the right to non-discrimination, in relation to the use of high-risk AI systems referred to in Annex III shall have the power to request and access any documentation created or maintained under this Regulation when access to that documentation is necessary for the fulfilment of the competences under their mandate within the limits of their jurisdiction. The relevant public authority or body shall inform the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned of any such request.
4. By 3 months after the entering into force of this Regulation, each Member State shall identify the public authorities or bodies referred to in paragraph 3 and make the list publicly available. Member States shall notify the list to the Commission and all other Member States and keep the list up to date.
5. Where the documentation referred to in paragraph 3 is insufficient to ascertain whether a breach of obligations under Union law intended to protect fundamental rights has occurred, the public authority or body referred to paragraph 3 may make a reasoned request to the market surveillance authority to organise testing of the high-risk AI system through technical means. The market surveillance authority shall organise the testing with the close involvement of the requesting public authority or body within reasonable time following the request.
6. Any information and documentation obtained by the national public authorities or bodies referred to in paragraph 3 pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be treated in compliance with the confidentiality obligations set out in Article 70.

== Article 65: Procedure for dealing with AI systems presenting a risk at national level
1. AI systems presenting a risk shall be understood as a product presenting a risk defined in Article 3, point 19 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 insofar as risks to the health or safety or to fundamental rights of persons are concerned.
2. Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State has sufficient reasons to consider that an AI system presents a risk as referred to in paragraph 1, they shall carry out an evaluation of the AI system concerned in respect of its compliance with all the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation. When risks to fundamental rights are identified, the market surveillance authority shall also inform the relevant national public authorities or bodies referred to in Article 64(3). The relevant operators shall cooperate as necessary with the market surveillance authorities and the other national public authorities or bodies referred to in Article 64(3).
Where, in the course of that evaluation, the market surveillance authority finds that the AI system does not comply with the requirements and obligations laid down in this Regulation, it shall without undue delay require the relevant operator to take all appropriate corrective actions to bring the AI system into compliance, to withdraw the AI system from the market, or to recall it, within a period it may prescribe.
The market surveillance authority shall inform the relevant notified body accordingly. Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 shall apply to the measures referred to in the second subparagraph.
3. Where the market surveillance authority considers that non-compliance is not restricted to its national territory, it shall inform the Commission and the other Member States without undue delay of the results of the evaluation and of the actions which it has required the operator to take.
4. The operator shall ensure that all appropriate corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that it has made available on the market throughout the Union.
5. Where the operator of an AI system does not take adequate corrective action within the period referred to in paragraph 2, the market surveillance authority shall take all appropriate provisional measures to prohibit or restrict the AI system's being made available on its national market, to withdraw the product from that market or to recall it. That authority shall notify the Commission and the other Member States, without undue delay, of those measures.
6. The notification referred to in paragraph 5 shall include all available details, in particular the information necessary for the identification of the non-compliant AI system, the origin of the AI system, the nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and duration of the national measures taken and the arguments put forward by the relevant operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the non-compliance is due to one or more of the following:
(-a) non-compliance with the prohibition of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5;
(a) a failure of a high-risk AI system to meet requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2;
(b) shortcomings in the harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 conferring a presumption of conformity.
(c) non-compliance with provisions set out in Article 52;
(d) non-compliance of general purpose AI systems with the requirements and obligations referred to in Article 4a;
7. The market surveillance authorities of the Member States other than the market surveillance authority of the Member State initiating the procedure shall without undue delay inform the Commission and the other Member States of any measures adopted and of any additional information at their disposal relating to the non-compliance of the AI system concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the notified national measure, of their objections.
8. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in paragraph 5, no objection has been raised by either a Member State or the Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified. This is without prejudice to the procedural rights of the concerned operator in accordance with Article 18 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. The period referred to in the first sentence of this paragraph shall be reduced to 30 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5.
9. The market surveillance authorities of all Member States shall then ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the AI system concerned, such as withdrawal of the product from their market, without undue delay.

== Article 66: Union safeguard procedure
1. Where, within three months of receipt of the notification referred to in Article 65(5), or 30 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5, objections are raised by a Member State against a measure taken by another Member State, or where the Commission considers the measure to be contrary to Union law, the Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the relevant Member State’s market surveillance authority and operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measure. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide whether the national measure is justified or not within 9 months, or 60 days in the case of non-compliance with the prohibition of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5, starting from the notification referred to in Article 65(5). It shall and notify such decision to the Member State concerned. The Commission shall also inform all other Member States of such decision.
2. If the measure taken by the relevant Member State’s market surveillance authority is considered justified by the Commission, the market surveillance authorities of all Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive measures are taken in respect of the AI system concerned, such as withdrawal of the AI system from their market without undue delay, and shall inform the Commission accordingly. If the national measure is considered unjustified by the Commission, the market surveillance authority of the Member State concerned shall withdraw the measure and inform the Commission accordingly.
3. Where the national measure is considered justified and the non-compliance of the AI system is attributed to shortcomings in the harmonised standards or common specifications referred to in Articles 40 and 41 of this Regulation, the Commission shall apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012.

== Article 67: Compliant high-risk or general purpose AI systems which present a risk
1. Where, having performed an evaluation under Article 65, the market surveillance authority of a Member State finds that although a high-risk or general purpose AI system is in compliance with this Regulation, it presents a risk to the health or safety of persons or to fundamental rights, it shall require the relevant operator to take all appropriate measures to ensure that the AI system concerned, when placed on the market or put into service, no longer presents that risk, to withdraw the AI system from the market or to recall it without undue delay, within a period it may prescribe.
2. The provider or other relevant operators shall ensure that corrective action is taken in respect of all the AI systems concerned that they have made available on the market throughout the Union within the timeline prescribed by the market surveillance authority of the Member State referred to in paragraph 1.
3. The Member State shall immediately inform the Commission and the other Member States. That information shall include all available details, in particular the data necessary for the identification of the AI system concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the AI system, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and duration of the national measures taken.
4. The Commission shall without undue delay enter into consultation with the Member States concerned and the relevant operator and shall evaluate the national measures taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall decide whether the measure is justified or not and, where necessary, propose appropriate measures.
5. The Commission shall address its decision to the Member States concerned, and inform all other Member States.

== Article 68: Formal non-compliance
1. Where the market surveillance authority of a Member State makes one of the following findings, it shall require the relevant provider to put an end to the non-compliance concerned, within a period it may prescribe:
(a) the conformity marking has been affixed in violation of Article 49;
(b) the conformity marking has not been affixed;
(c) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up;
(d) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up correctly;
(e) the identification number of the notified body, which is involved in the conformity assessment procedure, where applicable, has not been affixed;
2. Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1 persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate measures to restrict or prohibit the high-risk AI system being made available on the market or ensure that it is recalled or withdrawn from the market.

== Article 68a: Union testing facilities in the area of artificial intelligence
1. The Commission shall designate one or more Union testing facilities pursuant to Article 21 of Regulation (EU) 1020/2019 in the area of artificial intelligence.
2. Without prejudice to the activities of Union testing facilities referred to in Article 21(6) of Regulation (EU) 1020/2019, Union testing facilities referred to in paragraph 1 shall also provide independent technical or scientific advice at the request of the Board or market surveillance authorities.

== Article 68b: Central pool of independent experts
1. Upon request of the AI Board, the Commission shall, by means of an implementing act, make provisions on the creation, maintenance and financing of a central pool of independent experts to support the enforcement activities under this Regulation.
2. Experts shall be selected by the Commission and included in the central pool on the basis of up-to-date scientific or technical expertise in the field of artificial intelligence, having due regard to the technical areas covered by the requirements and obligations in this Regulation and the activities of market surveillance authorities pursuant to Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 1020/2019. The Commission shall determine the number of experts in the pool in accordance with the required needs.
3. Experts may have the following tasks:
(a) provide advice to and support the work of market surveillance authorities, at their request;
(b) support cross-border market surveillance investigations as referred to in Article 58(h), without prejudice of the powers of market surveillance authorities;
(c) advise and support the Commission when carrying out its duties in the context of the safeguard clause pursuant to Article 66.
4. The experts shall perform their tasks with impartiality, objectivity and ensure the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities. Each expert shall draw up a declaration of interests, which shall be made publicly available. The Commission shall establish systems and procedures to actively manage and prevent potential conflicts of interest.
5. The Member States may be required to pay fees for the advice and support by the experts. The structure and the level of fees as well as the scale and structure of recoverable costs shall be adopted by the Commission by means of the implementing act referred to in paragraph 1, taking into account the objectives of the adequate implementation of this Regulation, cost-effectiveness and the necessity to ensure an effective access to experts by all Member States.
6. The Commission shall facilitate timely access to the experts by the Member States, as needed, and ensure that the combination of support activities carried out by Union testing facilities pursuant to Article 68a and experts pursuant to this Article is efficiently organised and provides the best possible added value.

## TITLE IX:CODES OF CONDUCT

== Article 69: Codes of conduct for voluntary application of specific requirements
1. The Commission, and the Member States shall facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct intended to encourage the voluntary application to AI systems other than high-risk AI systems of one or more of the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of this Regulation to the best extent possible, taking into account the available, technical solutions allowing for the application of such requirements.
2. The Commission and the Member States shall facilitate the drawing up of codes of conduct intended to encourage the voluntary application to all AI systems of specific requirements related, for example, to environmental sustainability, including as regards energy-efficient programming, accessibility for persons with a disability, stakeholders participation in the design and development of the AI systems and diversity of development teams on the basis of clear objectives and key performance indicators to measure the achievement of those objectives. The Commission and the Member States shall also facilitate, where appropriate, the drawing of codes of conduct applicable on a voluntary basis with regard to users' obligations in relation to AI systems.
3. Codes of conduct applicable on a voluntary basis may be drawn up by individual providers of AI systems or by organisations representing them or by both, including with the involvement of users and any interested stakeholders and their representative organisations, or, where appropriate, by users with regard to their obligations. Codes of conduct may cover one or more AI systems taking into account the similarity of the intended purpose of the relevant systems.
4. The Commission and the Member States shall take into account the specific interests and needs of SME providers, including start-ups, when encouraging and facilitating the drawing up of codes of conduct referred to in this Article.

## TITLE X:CONFIDENTIALITY AND PENALTIES

== Article 70: Confidentiality
1. National competent authorities, notified bodies, the Commission, the Board, and any other natural or legal person involved in the application of this Regulation shall, in accordance with Union or national law, put appropriate technical and organisational measures in place to ensure the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks and activities in such a manner as to protect, in particular:
(a) intellectual property rights, and confidential business information or trade secrets of a natural or legal person, including source code, except the cases referred to in Article 5 of Directive 2016/943 on the protection of undisclosed know-how and business information (trade secrets) against their unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure apply.
(b) the effective implementation of this Regulation, in particular for the purpose of inspections, investigations or audits;
(c) public and national security interests;
(d) integrity of criminal or administrative proceedings;
(e) the integrity of information classified in accordance with Union or national law.
2. Without prejudice to paragraph 1, information exchanged on a confidential basis between the national competent authorities and between national competent authorities and the Commission shall not be disclosed without the prior consultation of the originating national competent authority and the user when high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III are used by law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities, when such disclosure would jeopardise public and national security interests. This obligation to exchange information shall not cover sensitive operational data in relation to the activities of law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities.
When the law enforcement, immigration or asylum authorities are providers of high-risk AI systems referred to in points 1, 6 and 7 of Annex III, the technical documentation referred to in Annex IV shall remain within the premises of those authorities. Those authorities shall ensure that the market surveillance authorities referred to in Article 63(5) and (6), as applicable, can, upon request, immediately access the documentation or obtain a copy thereof. Only staff of the market surveillance authority holding the appropriate level of security clearance shall be allowed to access that documentation or any copy thereof.
3. Paragraphs 1 and 2 shall not affect the rights and obligations of the Commission, Member States and their relevant authorities, as well as notified bodies, with regard to the exchange of information and the dissemination of warnings, including in the context of cross-border cooperation, nor the obligations of the parties concerned to provide information under criminal law of the Member States.

== Article 71: Penalties
1. In compliance with the terms and conditions laid down in this Regulation, Member States shall lay down the rules on penalties, including administrative fines, applicable to infringements of this Regulation and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they are properly and effectively implemented. The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate, and dissuasive. They shall take into particular account the size and interests of SME providers, including start-ups, and their economic viability. They shall also take into account whether the use of the AI system is in the context of personal non professional activity.
2. The Member States shall without delay notify the Commission of those rules and of those measures and of any subsequent amendment affecting them.
3. Non-compliance with any of the prohibitions of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5 shall be subject to administrative fines of up to 30 000 000 EUR or, if the offender is company, up to 6 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher. In case of SMEs, including start-ups, these fines shall be up to 3% of their worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year.
4. Infringements of the following provisions related to operators or notified bodies, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to 20 000 000 EUR or, if the offender is a company, up to 4 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher:
(-a) obligations of providers pursuant to Articles 4b and 4c;
(a) obligations of providers pursuant to Article 16;
(b) obligations for certain other persons pursuant to Article 23a;
(c) obligations of authorised representatives pursuant to Article 25;
(d) obligations of importers pursuant to Article 26;
(e) obligations of distributors pursuant to Article 27;
(f) obligations of users pursuant to Article 29, paragraphs 1 to 6a;
(g) requirements and obligations of notified bodies pursuant to Article 33, 34(1), 34(3), 34(4), 34a;
(h) transparency obligations for providers and users pursuant to Article 52.
In case of SMEs, including start-ups, these fines shall be up to 2% of their worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year.
5. The supply of incorrect, incomplete or misleading information to notified bodies and national competent authorities in reply to a request shall be subject to administrative fines of up to 10 000 000 EUR or, if the offender is a company, up to 2 % of its total worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year, whichever is higher. In case of SMEs, including start-ups, these fines shall be up to 1% of their worldwide annual turnover for the preceding financial year.
6. When deciding on the amount of the administrative fine in each individual case, all relevant circumstances of the specific situation shall be taken into account and due regard shall be given to the following:
(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement and of its consequences; (aa) the intentional or negligent character of the infringement;
(ab) any action taken by the operator in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effects of the infringement;
(b) whether administrative fines have been already applied by other market surveillance authorities in other Member States to the same operator for the same infringement;
(ba) whether administrative fines have been already applied by other authorities to the same operator for infringements of other Union or national law, when such infringements result from the same activity or omission constituting a relevant infringement of this Act;
(c) the size, the annual turnover and market share of the operator committing the infringement;
(d) any other aggravating or mitigating factor applicable to the circumstances of the case, such as financial benefits gained, or losses avoided, directly or indirectly, from the infringement.
7. Each Member State shall lay down rules on whether and to what extent administrative fines may be imposed on public authorities and bodies established in that Member State.
8. Depending on the legal system of the Member States, the rules on administrative fines may be applied in such a manner that the fines are imposed by competent national courts or other bodies as applicable in those Member States. The application of such rules in those Member States shall have an equivalent effect.
9. The exercise by the market surveillance authority of its powers under this Article shall be subject to appropriate procedural safeguards in accordance with Union and Member State law, including effective judicial remedy and due process.

== Article 72: Administrative fines on Union institutions, agencies and bodies
1. The European Data Protection Supervisor may impose administrative fines on Union institutions, agencies and bodies falling within the scope of this Regulation. When deciding whether to impose an administrative fine and deciding on the amount of the administrative fine in each individual case, all relevant circumstances of the specific situation shall be taken into account and due regard shall be given to the following:
(a) the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement and of its consequences;
(b) the cooperation with the European Data Protection Supervisor in order to remedy the infringement and mitigate the possible adverse effects of the infringement, including compliance with any of the measures previously ordered by the European Data Protection Supervisor against the Union institution or agency or body concerned with regard to the same subject matter;
(c) any similar previous infringements by the Union institution, agency or body;
2. Non-compliance with any of the prohibitions of the artificial intelligence practices referred to in Article 5 shall be subject to administrative fines of up to 500 000 EUR.
3. Non-compliance of the AI system with any requirements or obligations under this Regulation, other than those laid down in Articles 5 and 10, shall be subject to administrative fines of up to 250 000 EUR.
4. Before taking decisions pursuant to this Article, the European Data Protection Supervisor shall give the Union institution, agency or body which is the subject of the proceedings conducted by the European Data Protection Supervisor the opportunity of being heard on the matter regarding the possible infringement. The European Data Protection Supervisor shall base his or her decisions only on elements and circumstances on which the parties concerned have been able to comment. Complainants, if any, shall be associated closely with the proceedings.
5. The rights of defense of the parties concerned shall be fully respected in the proceedings. They shall be entitled to have access to the European Data Protection Supervisor’s file, subject to the legitimate interest of individuals or undertakings in the protection of their personal data or business secrets.
6. Funds collected by imposition of fines in this Article shall be the income of the general budget of the Union.

## TITLE XI:DELEGATION OF POWER AND COMMITTEE PROCEDURE

== Article 73: Exercise of the delegation
1. The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission subject to the conditions laid down in this Article.
2. The delegation of power referred to in Article 7(1), Article 7(3), Article 11(3), Article 43(5) and (6) and Article 48(5) shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from [entering into force of the Regulation].
The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the 5 year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
3. The delegation of power referred to in Article 7(1), Article 7(3), Article 11(3), Article 43(5) and (6) and Article 48(5) may be revoked at any time by the European Parliament or by the Council. A decision of revocation shall put an end to the delegation of power specified in that decision. It shall take effect the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union or at a later date specified therein. It shall not affect the validity of any delegated acts already in force.
4. As soon as it adopts a delegated act, the Commission shall notify it simultaneously to the European Parliament and to the Council.
5. Any delegated act adopted pursuant to Article 7(1), Article 7(3), Article 11(3), Article 43(5) and (6) and Article 48(5) shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed by either the European Parliament or the Council within a period of three months of notification of that act to the European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the Commission that they will not object. That period shall be extended by three months at the initiative of the European Parliament or of the Council.

== Article 74: Committee procedure
1. The Commission shall be assisted by a committee. That committee shall be a committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
2. Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

## TITLE XII:FINAL PROVISIONS

== Article 75: Amendment to Regulation (EC) No 300/2008
1. In Article 4(3) of Regulation (EC) No 300/2008, the following subparagraph is added:
“When adopting detailed measures related to technical specifications and procedures for approval and use of security equipment concerning Artificial Intelligence systems in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Chapter 2, Title III of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”

== Article 76: Amendment to Regulation (EU) No 167/2013
1. In Article 17(5) of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013, the following subparagraph is added:
“When adopting delegated acts pursuant to the first subparagraph concerning artificial intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 77: Amendment to Regulation (EU) No 168/2013
1. In Article 22(5) of Regulation (EU) No 168/2013, the following subparagraph is added:
“When adopting delegated acts pursuant to the first subparagraph concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX on [Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 78: Amendment to Directive 2014/90/EU
1. In Article 8 of Directive 2014/90/EU, the following paragraph is added:
“4. For Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, when carrying out its activities pursuant to paragraph 1 and when adopting technical specifications and testing standards in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3, the Commission shall take into account the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation.

== Article 79: Amendment to Directive (EU) 2016/797
1. In Article 5 of Directive (EU) 2016/797, the following paragraph is added:
“12. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraph 1 and implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 11 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 80: Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2018/858
1. In Article 5 of Regulation (EU) 2018/858 the following paragraph is added:
“4. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraph 3 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council *, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 81: Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2018/1139
1. Regulation (EU) 2018/1139 is amended as follows:
1. In Article 17, the following paragraph is added:
“3. Without prejudice to paragraph 2, when adopting implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 1 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.
2. In Article 19, the following paragraph is added:
“4. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence], the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”
3. In Article 43, the following paragraph is added:
“4. When adopting implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 1 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence], the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”
4. In Article 47, the following paragraph is added:
“3. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence], the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”
5. In Article 57, the following paragraph is added:
“When adopting those implementing acts concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence], the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”
6. In Article 58, the following paragraph is added:
“3. When adopting delegated acts pursuant to paragraphs 1 and 2 concerning Artificial Intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] , the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.”.

== Article 82: Amendment to Regulation (EU) 2019/2144
1. In Article 11 of Regulation (EU) 2019/2144, the following paragraph is added:
“3. When adopting the implementing acts pursuant to paragraph 2, concerning artificial intelligence systems which are safety components in the meaning of Regulation (EU) YYY/XX [on Artificial Intelligence] of the European Parliament and of the Council*, the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 of that Regulation shall be taken into account.

== Article 83: AI systems already placed on the market or put into service
1. This Regulation shall not apply to the AI systems which are components of the large-scale IT systems established by the legal acts listed in Annex IX that have been placed on the market or put into service before [12 months after the date of application of this Regulation referred to in Article 85(2)], unless the replacement or amendment of those legal acts leads to a significant change in the design or intended purpose of the AI system or AI systems concerned.
The requirements laid down in this Regulation shall be taken into account, where applicable, in the evaluation of each large-scale IT systems established by the legal acts listed in Annex IX to be undertaken as provided for in those respective acts.
2. This Regulation shall apply to the high-risk AI systems, other than the ones referred to in paragraph 1, that have been placed on the market or put into service before [date of application of this Regulation referred to in Article 85(2)], only if, from that date, those systems are subject to significant changes in their design or intended purpose.

== Article 84: Evaluation and review
1. [deleted]
1b. The Commission shall assess the need for amendment of the list in Annex III every 24 months following the entry into force of this Regulation and until the end of the period of the delegation of power. The findings of that assessment shall be presented to the European Parliament and the Council.
2. By [three years after the date of application of this Regulation referred to in Article 85(2)] and every four years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report on the evaluation and review of this Regulation to the European Parliament and to the Council. The reports shall be made public.
3. The reports referred to in paragraph 2 shall devote specific attention to the following:
(a) the status of the financial resources, technical equipment and human resources of the national competent authorities in order to effectively perform the tasks assigned to them under this Regulation;
(b) the state of penalties, and notably administrative fines as referred to in Article 71(1), applied by Member States to infringements of the provisions of this Regulation.
4. Within [three years after the date of application of this Regulation referred to in Article 85(2)] and every four years thereafter, where appropriate, the Commission shall evaluate the impact and effectiveness of voluntary codes of conduct to foster the application of the requirements set out in Title III, Chapter 2 for AI systems other than high-risk AI systems and possibly other additional requirements for AI systems, including as regards environmental sustainability.
5. For the purpose of paragraphs 1a to 4 the Board, the Member States and national competent authorities shall provide the Commission with information on its request.
6. In carrying out the evaluations and reviews referred to in paragraphs 1a to 4 the Commission shall take into account the positions and findings of the Board, of the European Parliament, of the Council, and of other relevant bodies or sources.
7. The Commission shall, if necessary, submit appropriate proposals to amend this Regulation, in particular taking into account developments in technology and in the light of the state of progress in the information society.

== Article 85: Entry into force and application
1. This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union.
2. This Regulation shall apply from [36 months following the entering into force of the Regulation].
3. By way of derogation from paragraph 2:
(a) Title III, Chapter 4 and Title VI shall apply from [twelve months following the entry into force of this Regulation];
(b) Article 71 shall apply from [twelve months following the entry into force of this Regulation].