(1)  The purpose of this Regulation is to improve the functioning of the internal market by laying
down a uniform legal framework in particular for the development, marketing and use of
artificial intelligence in conformity with Union values. This Regulation pursues a number of
overriding reasons of public interest, such as a high level of protection of health, safety and
fundamental rights, and it ensures the free movement of AI-based goods and services cross-
border, thus preventing Member States from imposing restrictions on the development,
marketing and use of AI systems, unless explicitly authorised by this Regulation.
(2)  Artificial intelligence systems (AI systems) can be easily deployed in multiple sectors of the
economy and society, including cross border, and circulate throughout the Union. Certain
Member States have already explored the adoption of national rules to ensure that artificial
intelligence is safe and is developed and used in compliance with fundamental rights
obligations. Differing national rules may lead to fragmentation of the internal market and
decrease legal certainty for operators that develop, import or use AI systems. A consistent
and high level of protection throughout the Union should therefore be ensured, while
divergences hampering the free circulation of AI systems and related products and services
within the internal market should be prevented, by laying down uniform obligations for
operators and guaranteeing the uniform protection of overriding reasons of public interest
and of rights of persons throughout the internal market based on Article 114 of the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). To the extent that this Regulation contains
specific rules on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data
concerning restrictions of the use of AI systems for ‘real-time’ remote biometric
identification in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement, it is
appropriate to base this Regulation, in as far as those specific rules are concerned, on Article
16 of the TFEU. In light of those specific rules and the recourse to Article 16 TFEU, it is
appropriate to consult the European Data Protection Board.
(3)  Artificial intelligence is a fast evolving family of technologies that can contribute to a wide
array of economic and societal benefits across the entire spectrum of industries and social
activities. By improving prediction, optimising operations and resource allocation, and
personalising digital solutions available for individuals and organisations, the use of
artificial intelligence can provide key competitive advantages to companies and support
socially and environmentally beneficial outcomes, for example in healthcare, farming,
education and training, infrastructure management, energy, transport and logistics, public
services, security, justice, resource and energy efficiency, and climate change mitigation and
adaptation.
(4)  At the same time, depending on the circumstances regarding its specific application and use,
artificial intelligence may generate risks and cause harm to public interests and rights that
are protected by Union law. Such harm might be material or immaterial.
(5)  A Union legal framework laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence is
therefore needed to foster the development, use and uptake of artificial intelligence in the
internal market that at the same time meets a high level of protection of public interests,
such as health and safety and the protection of fundamental rights, as recognised and
protected by Union law. To achieve that objective, rules regulating the placing on the market
and putting into service of certain AI systems should be laid down, thus ensuring the smooth
functioning of the internal market and allowing those systems to benefit from the principle
of free movement of goods and services. By laying down those rules and building on the
work of the High-level Expert Group on Artificial Intelligence as reflecetd  in the Guidelines
for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence in the EU, this Regulation supports the objective of
the Union of being a global leader in the development of secure, trustworthy and ethical
artificial intelligence as stated by the European Council4, and it ensures the protection of
ethical principles, as specifically requested by the European Parliament5.


(5a)  The harmonised rules on the placing on the market, putting into service and use of AI
systems laid down in this Regulation should apply across sectors and, in line with its New
Legislative Framework approach,  should be without prejudice to existing Union law,
notably on data protection, consumer protection, fundamental rights, employment and
product safety, to which this Regulation is complementary. As a consequence all rights and
remedies afforded by such Union law to consumers and other persons who may be
negatively impacted by AI systems, including as regards the compensation of possible
damages pursuant to Council Directive 85/374/EEC of 25 July 1985 on the approximation of
the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning
liability for defective products, remain unaffected and fully applicable. On top of that, this
Regulation aims to strengthen the effectiveness of such existing rights and remedies by
establishing specific requirements and obligations, including in respect of transparency,
technical documentation and record-keeping of AI systems. Furthermore, the obligations
placed on various operators involved in the AI value chain under this Regulation should
apply without prejudice to national laws, in compliance with Union law,  having the effect
of limiting the use of certain AI systems where such laws fall outside the scope of this
Regulation or pursue other legitimate public interest objectives than those pursued by this
Regulation. For example, national labour law and the laws on the protection of minors (i.e.
persons below the age of 18) taking into account the United Nations General Comment No
25 (2021) on children’s rights,  insofar as they are not specific to AI systems and pursue
other legimitate public interest objectives, should not be affected by this Regulation.

(6)  The notion of AI system should be clearly defined to ensure legal certainty, while providing
the flexibility to accommodate future technological developments. The definition should be
based on key functional characteristics of artificial intelligence such as its learning,
reasoning or modelling capabilities, distinguishing it from simpler software systems and
programming approaches. In particular, for the purposes of this Regulation AI systems
should have the ability, on the basis of machine and/or human-based data and inputs, to infer
the way to achieve a set of final objectives given to them by humans, using machine learning
and/or logic- and knowledge based approaches and to  produce outputs such as content for
generative AI systems (e.g. text, video or images), predictions, recommendations or
decisions, influencing the environment with which the system interacts, be it in a physical or
digital dimension. A system that uses rules defined solely by natural persons to
automatically execute operations should not be considered an AI system. AI systems can be
designed to operate with varying levels of autonomy and be used on a stand-alone basis or
as a component of a product, irrespective of whether the system is physically integrated into
the product (embedded) or serve the functionality of the product without being integrated
therein (non-embedded). The concept of the autonomy of an AI system relates to the degree
to which such a system functions without human involvement.
(6a)   Machine learning approaches focus on the development of systems capable of learning and
inferring from data to solve an application problem without being explicitly programmed
with a set of step-by-step instructions from input to output. Learning refers to the
computational process of optimizing from data the parameters of the model, which is a
mathematical construct generating an output based on input data. The range of problems
addressed by machine learning typically involves tasks for which other approaches fail,
either because there is no suitable formalisation of the problem, or because the resolution of
the problem is intractable with non-learning approaches. Machine learning approaches
include for instance supervised, unsupervised and reinforcement learning, using a variety of
methods including deep learning with neural networks, statistical techniques for learning
and inference (including for instance logistic regression, Bayesian estimation) and search
and optimisation methods.

(6b)   Logic- and knowledge based approaches focus on the development of systems with logical
reasoning capabilities on knowledge to solve an application problem. Such systems typically
involve a knowledge base and an inference engine that generates outputs by reasoning on
the knowledge base. The knowledge base, which is usually encoded by human experts,
represents entities and logical relationships relevant for the application problem through
formalisms based on rules, ontologies, or knowledge graphs. The inference engine acts on
the knowledge base and extracts new information through operations such as sorting,
searching, matching or chaining. Logic- and knowledge based approaches include for
instance knowledge representation, inductive (logic) programming, knowledge bases,
inference and deductive engines, (symbolic) reasoning, expert systems and search and
optimisation methods.
(6c)   In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation as regards
machine learning approaches and logic- and knowledged based approaches and to take
account of market and technological developments, implementing powers should be
conferred on the Commission.
(6d)  The notion of ‘user’ referred to in this Regulation should be interpreted as any natural or
legal person, including  a public authority, agency or other body, using an AI system under
whose authority the system is used. Depending on the type of AI system, the use of the
system may affect persons other than the user.


(7)  The notion of biometric data used in this Regulation should be interpreted consistently with
the notion of biometric data as defined in Article 4(14) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the
European Parliament and of the Council6, Article 3(18) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 of the
European Parliament and of the Council7 and Article 3(13) of Directive (EU) 2016/680 of
the European Parliament and of the Council8.


(8)  The notion of remote biometric identification system as used in this Regulation should be
defined functionally, as an AI system intended for the identification of natural persons
typically at a distance, without their active involvement, through the comparison of a
person’s biometric data with the biometric data contained in a reference data repository,
irrespectively of the particular technology, processes or types of biometric data used. Such
remote biometric identification systems are typically used to perceive (scan) multiple
persons or their behaviour simultaneously in order to facilitate significantly the
identification of a number of persons without their active involvement. Such a definition
excludes verification/authentication systems whose sole purpose would be to confirm that a
specific natural person is the person he or she claims to be, as well as systems that are used
to confirm the identity of a natural person for the sole purpose of having access to a service,
a device or premises. This exclusion is justified by the fact that such systems are likely to
have a minor impact on fundamental rights of natural persons compared to remote biometric
identification systems which may be used for the processing of the biometric data of a large
number of persons. In the case of ‘real-time’ systems, the capturing of the biometric data,
the comparison and the identification occur all instantaneously, near-instantaneously or in
any event without a significant delay. In this regard, there should be no scope for
circumventing the rules of this Regulation on the ‘real-time’ use of the AI systems in
question by providing for minor delays. ‘Real-time’ systems involve the use of ‘live’ or
‘near-‘live’ material, such as video footage, generated by a camera or other device with
similar functionality. In the case of ‘post’ systems, in contrast, the biometric data have
already been captured and the comparison and identification occur only after a significant
delay. This involves material, such as pictures or video footage generated by closed circuit
television cameras or private devices, which has been generated before the use of the system
in respect of the natural persons concerned.
(9)  For the purposes of this Regulation the notion of publicly accessible space should be
understood as referring to any physical place that is accessible to an undetermined number
of natural persons, and irrespective of whether the place in question is privately or publicly
owned. and irrepective of the activity for which the place may be used, such as commerce
(for instance, shops, restaurants, cafés), services (for instance, banks, professional activities,
hospitality), sport (for instance, swimming pools, gyms, stadiums), transport (for instance,
bus, metro and railway stations, airports, means of transport ), entertainment (for instance,
cinemas, theatres, museums, concert and conference halls) leisure or otherwise (for instance,
public roads and squares, parks, forests, playgrounds). A place should be classified as
publicly accessible also if, regardless of potential capacity or security restrictions, access is
subject to certain predetermined conditions, which can be fulfilled by an undetermined
number of persons, such as purchase of a ticket or title of transport, prior registration or
having a certain age. By contrast, a place should not be considered publicly accessible if
access is limited to specific and defined natural persons through either Union or national law
directly related to public safety or security or through the clear manifestation of will by the
person having the relevant authority on the place. The factual possibility of access alone
(e.g. an unlocked door, an open gate in a fence) does not imply that the place is publicly
accessible in the presence of indications or circumstances suggesting the contrary (e.g. signs
prohibiting or restricting access). Company and factory premises as well as offices and
workplaces that are intended to be accessed only by relevant employees and service
providers are places that are not publicly accessible. Publicly accessible spaces should not
include prisons or border control areas. Some other areas may be composed of both not
publicly accessible and publicly accessible areas, such as the hallway of a private residential
building necessary to access a doctor's office or an airport. Online spaces are not covered
either, as they are not physical spaces. Whether a given space is accessible to the public
should however be determined on a case-by-case basis, having regard to the specificities of
the individual situation at hand.
(10)  In order to ensure a level playing field and an effective protection of rights and freedoms of
individuals across the Union, the rules established by this Regulation should apply to
providers of AI systems in a non-discriminatory manner, irrespective of whether they are
established within the Union or in a third country, and to users of AI systems established
within the Union.

(11)  In light of their digital nature, certain AI systems should fall within the scope of this
Regulation even when they are neither placed on the market, nor put into service, nor used
in the Union. This is the case for example of an operator established in the Union that
contracts certain services to an operator established outside the Union in relation to an
activity to be performed by an AI system that would qualify as high-risk. In those
circumstances, the AI system used by the operator outside the Union could process data
lawfully collected in and transferred from the Union, and provide to the contracting operator
in the Union the output of that AI system resulting from that processing, without that AI
system being placed on the market, put into service or used in the Union. To prevent the
circumvention of this Regulation and to ensure an effective protection of natural persons
located in the Union, this Regulation should also apply to providers and users of AI systems
that are established in a third country, to the extent the output produced by those systems is
used in the Union. Nonetheless, to take into account existing arrangements and special needs
for future cooperation with foreign partners with whom information and evidence is
exchanged, this Regulation should not apply to public authorities of a third country and
international organisations when acting in the framework of international agreements
concluded at national or European level for law enforcement and judicial cooperation with
the Union or with its Member States. Such agreements have been concluded bilaterally
between Member States and third countries or between the European Union, Europol and
other EU agencies and third countries and international organisations. Recipient Member
States authorities and Union institutions, offices, bodies and bodies making use of such
outputs in the Union remain accountable to ensure their use comply with Union law. When
those international agreements are revised or new ones are concluded in the future, the
contracting parties should undertake the utmost effort to align those agreements with the
requirements of this Regulation.
(12)  This Regulation should also apply to Union institutions, offices, bodies and agencies when
acting as a provider or user of an AI system.

(-12a)  If and insofar AI systems are placed on the market, put into service, or used with or without
modification of such systems for military, defence or national security purposes, those
should be excluded from the scope of this Regulation regardless of which type of entity is
carrying out those activities, such as whether it is a public or private entity. As regards
military and defence purposes, such exclusion is justified both  by Article 4(2) TEU and by
the specifities of the Member States’ and the common Union defence policy covered by
Chapter 2 of Title V of the Treaty on European Union  (TEU) that are subject to public
international law, which is therefore the more appropriate legal framework for the regulation
of AI systems in the context of the use of lethal force and other AI systems in the context of
military and defence activities. As regards national security purposes, the exclusion is
justified both by the fact that national security remains the sole responsibility of Member
States in accordance with Article 4(2) TEU and by the specific nature and operational needs
of national security activities and specific national rules applicable to those activities.
Nonetheless, if an AI system developed, placed on the market, put into service or used for
military, defence or national security purposes is used outside those temporarily or
permanently for other purposes (for example, civilian or humanitarian purposes, law
enforcement or public security purposes), such a system would fall within the scope of this
Regulation. In that case, the entity using the system for other than military, defence or
national security purposes should ensure compliance of the system with this Regulation,
unless the system is already compliant with this Regulation. AI systems placed on the
market or put into service for an excluded (i.e. military, defence or national security) and
one or more non excluded purposes (e.g. civilian purposes, law enforcement, etc.), fall
within the scope of this Regulation and providers of those systems should ensure compliance
with this Regulation. In those cases, the fact that an AI system may fall within the scope of
this Regulation should not affect the possibility of entities carrying out national security,
defence and military activities, regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities,
to use AI systems for national security, military and defence purposes, the use of which is
excluded from the scope of this Regulation. An AI system placed on the market for civilian
or law enforcement purposes which is used with or without modification for military,
defence or national security purposes should not fall within the scope of this Regulation,
regardless of the type of entity carrying out those activities.

(12a)  This Regulation should be without prejudice to the provisions regarding the liability of
intermediary service providers set out in Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council [as amended by the Digital Services Act].
(12b)  This Regulation should not undermine research and development activity and should respect
freedom of science. It is therefore necessary to exclude from its scope AI systems
specifically developed and put into service for the sole purpose of scientific research and
development and to ensure that the Regulation does not otherwise affect scientific research
and development activity on AI systems. As regards product oriented research activity by
providers, the provisions of this Regulation should also not apply. This is without prejudice
to the obligation to comply with this Regulation when an AI system falling into the scope of
this Regulation is placed on the market or put into service as a result of such research and
development activity and to the application of provisions on regulatory sandboxes and
testing in real world conditions. Furthermore, without prejudice to the foregoing regarding
AI systems specifically developed and put into service for the sole purpose of scientific
research and development, any other AI system that may be used for the conduct of any
reaserch and development activity should remain subject to the provisions of this
Regulation. Under all circumstances, any research and development activity should be
carried out in accordance with recognised ethical and professional standards for scientific
research.

(12c)   In the light of the nature and complexity of the value chain for AI systems, it is essential to
clarify the role of actors who may contribute to the development of AI systems, notably
high-risk AI systems. In particular, it is necessary to clarify that general purpose AI systems
are AI systems that are intended by the provider to perform generally applicable functions,
such as image/speech recognition, and in a plurality of contexts. They may be used as high-
risk AI systems by themselves or be components of other high risk AI systems. Therefore,
due to their particular nature and in order to ensure a fair sharing of responsibilities along
the AI value chain, such systems should be subject to proportionate and more specific
requirements and obligations under this Regulation while ensuring a high level of protection
of fundamental rights, health and safety. In addition, the providers of general purpose AI
systems, irrespective of whether they may be used as high-risk AI systems as such by other
providers or as components of high-risk AI systems, should cooperate, as appropriate, with
the providers of the respective high-risk AI systems to enable their compliance with the
relevant obligations under this Regulation and with the competent authorities established
under this Regulation. In order to take into account the specific characteristics of general
purpose AI systems and the fast evolving market and technological developments in the
field, implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission to specify and adapt the
application of the requirements established under this Regulation to general purpose AI
systems and to specify the information to be shared by the providers of general purpose AI
systems in order to enable the providers of the respective high-risk AI system to comply
with their obligations under this Regulation.


(13)  In order to ensure a consistent and high level of protection of public interests as regards
health, safety and fundamental rights, common normative standards for all high-risk AI
systems should be established. Those standards should be consistent with the Charter of
fundamental rights of the European Union (the Charter) and should be non-discriminatory
and in line with the Union’s international trade commitments.
(14)  In order to introduce a proportionate and effective set of binding rules for AI systems, a
clearly defined risk-based approach should be followed. That approach should tailor the type
and content of such rules to the intensity and scope of the risks that AI systems can generate.
It is therefore necessary to prohibit certain artificial intelligence practices, to lay down
requirements for high-risk AI systems and obligations for the relevant operators, and to lay
down transparency obligations for certain AI systems.
(15)  Aside from the many beneficial uses of artificial intelligence, that technology can also be
misused and provide novel and powerful tools for manipulative, exploitative and social
control practices. Such practices are particularly harmful and should be prohibited because
they contradict Union values of respect for human dignity, freedom, equality, democracy
and the rule of law and Union fundamental rights, including the right to non-discrimination,
data protection and privacy and the rights of the child.


(16)  AI-enabled manipulative techniques can be used to persuade persons to engage in unwanted
behaviours, or to deceive them by nudging them into decisions in a way that subverts and
impairs their autonomy, decision-making and free choices. The placing on the market,
putting into service or use of certain AI systems materially distorting human behaviour,
whereby physical or psychological harms are likely to occur, are particularly dangerous and
should therefore be forbidden. Such AI systems deploy subliminal components such as
audio, image, video stimuli that persons cannot perceive as those stimuli are beyond human
perception or other subliminal techniques that subvert or impair person’s autonomy,
decision-making or free choices in ways that people are not consciously aware of, or even if
aware not able to control or resist, for example in cases of machine-brain interfaces or
virtual reality. In addition, AI systems may also  otherwise exploit vulnerabilities of a
specific group of persons due to their age, disability within the meaning of Directive (EU)
2019/882, or a specific social or economic situation that is likely to make those persons
more vulnerable to exploitation such as persons living in extreme poverty, ethnic or
religious minorities. Such AI systems can be placed on the market, put into service or used
with the objective to or the effect of materially distorting the behaviour of a person and in a
manner that causes or is reasonably likely to cause physical or phycological harm to that or
another person or groups of persons, including harms that may be accumulated over time.
The intention to distort the behaviour may not be presumed if the distortion results from
factors external to the AI system which are outside of the control of the provider or the user,
meaning factors that may not be reasonably foreseen and mitigated by the provider or the
user of the AI system. In any case, it is not necessary for the provider or the user to have the
intention to cause the physical or psychological harm, as long as such harm results from the
manipulative or exploitative AI-enabled practices. The prohibitions for such AI practices are
complementary to the provisions contained in Directive 2005/29/EC, notably that unfair
commercial practices leading to economic or financial harms to consumers are prohibited
under all circumstances, irrespective of whether they are put in place through AI systems or
otherwise. The prohibitions of manipulative and exploitative practices in this Regulation
should not affect lawful practices in the context of medical treatment such as psychological
treatment of a mental disease or physical rehabilitation, when those practices are carried out
in accordance with the applicable medical standards and legislation. In addition, common
and legitimate commercial practices that are in compliance with the applicable law should
not in themselves be regarded as constituting harmful manipulative AI practices.



(17)  AI systems providing social scoring of natural persons by public authorities or by private
actors may lead to discriminatory outcomes and the exclusion of certain groups. They may
violate the right to dignity and non-discrimination and the values of equality and justice.
Such AI systems evaluate or classify natural persons based on their social behaviour in
multiple contexts or known or predicted personal or personality characteristics. The social
score obtained from such AI systems may lead to the detrimental or unfavourable treatment
of natural persons or whole groups thereof in social contexts, which are unrelated to the
context in which the data was originally generated or collected or to a detrimental treatment
that is disproportionate or unjustified to the gravity of their social behaviour. AI systems
entailing such unacceptable scoring practices should be therefore prohibited. This
prohibition should not affect lawful evaluation practices of natural persons done for one or
more specific purpose in compliance with the law.
(18)  The use of AI systems for ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification of natural persons in
publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement is considered particularly
intrusive in the rights and freedoms of the concerned persons, to the extent that it may affect
the private life of a large part of the population, evoke a feeling of constant surveillance and
indirectly dissuade the exercise of the freedom of assembly and other fundamental rights. In
addition, the immediacy of the impact and the limited opportunities for further checks or
corrections in relation to the use of such systems operating in ‘real-time’ carry heightened
risks for the rights and freedoms of the persons that are concerned by law enforcement
activities.

(19)  The use of those systems for the purpose of law enforcement should therefore be prohibited,
except in exhaustively listed and narrowly defined situations, where the use is strictly
necessary to achieve a substantial public interest, the importance of which outweighs the
risks. Those situations involve the search for potential victims of crime, including missing
children; certain threats to the life or physical safety of natural persons or of a terrorist
attack; and the detection, localisation, identification or prosecution of perpetrators or
suspects of the criminal offences referred to in Council Framework Decision 2002/584/JHA9
if those criminal offences are punishable in the Member State concerned by a custodial
sentence or a detention order for a maximum period of at least three years and as they are
defined in the law of that Member State. Such threshold for the custodial sentence or
detention order in accordance with national law contributes to ensure that the offence should
be serious enough to potentially justify the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification
systems. Moreover, of the 32 criminal offences listed in the Council Framework Decision
2002/584/JHA, some are in practice likely to be more relevant than others, in that the
recourse to ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification will foreseeably be necessary and
proportionate to highly varying degrees for the practical pursuit of the detection,
localisation, identification or prosecution of a perpetrator or suspect of the different criminal
offences listed and having regard to the likely differences in the seriousness, probability and
scale of the harm or possible negative consequences. In addition, this Regulation should
preserve the ability for law enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities
to carry out identity checks in the presence of the person that is concerned in accordance
with the conditions set out in Union and national law for such checks. In particular, law
enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities should be able to use
information systems, in accordance with Union or national law, to identify a person who,
during an identity check, either refuses to be identified or is unable to state or prove his or
her identity, without being required by this Regulation to obtain prior authorisation. This
could be, for example, a person involved in a crime, being unwilling, or unable due to an
accident or a medical condition, to disclose their identity to law enforcement authorities.


(20)  In order to ensure that those systems are used in a responsible and proportionate manner, it
is also important to establish that, in each of those exhaustively listed and narrowly defined
situations, certain elements should be taken into account, in particular as regards the nature
of the situation giving rise to the request and the consequences of the use for the rights and
freedoms of all persons concerned and the safeguards and conditions provided for with the
use. In addition, the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems in publicly
accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement should be subject to appropriate limits
in time and space, having regard in particular to the evidence or indications regarding the
threats, the victims or perpetrator. The reference database of persons should be appropriate
for each use case in each of the situations mentioned above.
(21)  Each use of a ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification system in publicly accessible
spaces for the purpose of law enforcement should be subject to an express and specific
authorisation by a judicial authority or by an independent administrative authority of a
Member State. Such authorisation should in principle be obtained prior to the use of the
system with a view to identify a person or persons. Exceptions to this rule should be allowed
in duly justified situations of urgency, that is, situations where the need to use the systems in
question is such as to make it effectively and objectively impossible to obtain an
authorisation before commencing the use. In such situations of urgency, the use should be
restricted to the absolute minimum necessary and be subject to appropriate safeguards and
conditions, as determined in national law and specified in the context of each individual
urgent use case by the law enforcement authority itself. In addition, the law enforcement
authority should in such situations seek to obtain an authorisation as soon as possible, whilst
providing the reasons for not having been able to request it earlier.

(22)  Furthermore, it is appropriate to provide, within the exhaustive framework set by this
Regulation that such use in the territory of a Member State in accordance with this
Regulation should only be possible where and in as far as the Member State in question has
decided to expressly provide for the possibility to authorise such use in its detailed rules of
national law. Consequently, Member States remain free under this Regulation not to provide
for such a possibility at all or to only provide for such a possibility in respect of some of the
objectives capable of justifying authorised use identified in this Regulation.
(23)  The use of AI systems for ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification of natural persons in
publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law enforcement necessarily involves the
processing of biometric data. The rules of this Regulation that prohibit, subject to certain
exceptions, such use, which are based on Article 16 TFEU, should apply as lex specialis in
respect of the rules on the processing of biometric data contained in Article 10 of Directive
(EU) 2016/680, thus regulating such use and the processing of biometric data involved in an
exhaustive manner. Therefore, such use and processing should only be possible in as far as it
is compatible with the framework set by this Regulation, without there being scope, outside
that framework, for the competent authorities, where they act for purpose of law
enforcement, to use such systems and process such data in connection thereto on the grounds
listed in Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. In this context, this Regulation is not
intended to provide the legal basis for the processing of personal data under Article 8 of
Directive 2016/680. However, the use of ‘real-time’ remote biometric identification systems
in publicly accessible spaces for purposes other than law enforcement, including by
competent authorities, should not be covered by the specific framework regarding such use
for the purpose of law enforcement set by this Regulation. Such use for purposes other than
law enforcement should therefore not be subject to the requirement of an authorisation under
this Regulation and the applicable detailed rules of national law that may give effect to it.

(24)  Any processing of biometric data and other personal data involved in the use of AI systems
for biometric identification, other than in connection to the use of ‘real-time’ remote
biometric identification systems in publicly accessible spaces for the purpose of law
enforcement as regulated by this Regulation, should continue to comply with all
requirements resulting from Article 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. For purposes other than
law enforcement, Article 9(1) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10(1) of Regulation
(EU) 2018/1725 prohibit the processing of biometric data for the purpose of uniquely
identifying a natural person, unless one of the situations in the respective second paragraphs
of those two articles applies.
(25)  In accordance with Article 6a of Protocol No 21 on the position of the United Kingdom and
Ireland in respect of the area of freedom, security and justice, as annexed to the TEU and to
the TFEU, Ireland is not bound by the rules laid down in Article 5(1), point (d), (2), (3) and
(4) of this Regulation adopted on the basis of Article 16 of the TFEU which relate to the
processing of personal data by the Member States when carrying out activities falling within
the scope of Chapter 4 or Chapter 5 of Title V of Part Three of the TFEU, where Ireland is
not bound by the rules governing the forms of judicial cooperation in criminal matters or
police cooperation which require compliance with the provisions laid down on the basis of
Article 16 of the TFEU.
(26)  In accordance with Articles 2 and 2a of Protocol No 22 on the position of Denmark, annexed
to the TEU and TFEU, Denmark is not bound by rules laid down in Article 5(1), point (d),
(2), (3) and (4) of this Regulation adopted on the basis of Article 16 of the TFEU, or subject
to their application, which relate to the processing of personal data by the Member States
when carrying out activities falling within the scope of Chapter 4 or Chapter 5 of Title V of
Part Three of the TFEU.


(27)  High-risk AI systems should only be placed on the Union market or put into service if they
comply with certain mandatory requirements. Those requirements should ensure that high-
risk AI systems available in the Union or whose output is otherwise used in the Union do not
pose unacceptable risks to important Union public interests as recognised and protected by
Union law. AI systems identified as high-risk should be limited to those that have a
significant harmful impact on the health, safety and fundamental rights of persons in the
Union and such limitation minimises any potential restriction to international trade, if any.

(28)  AI systems could produce adverse outcomes to health and safety of persons, in particular
when such systems operate as components of products. Consistently with the objectives of
Union harmonisation legislation to facilitate the free movement of products in the internal
market and to ensure that only safe and otherwise compliant products find their way into the
market, it is important that the safety risks that may be generated by a product as a whole
due to its digital components, including AI systems, are duly prevented and mitigated. For
instance, increasingly autonomous robots, whether in the context of manufacturing or
personal assistance and care should be able to safely operate and performs their functions in
complex environments. Similarly, in the health sector where the stakes for life and health are
particularly high, increasingly sophisticated diagnostics systems and systems supporting
human decisions should be reliable and accurate. The extent of the adverse impact caused by
the AI system on the fundamental rights protected by the Charter is of particular relevance
when classifying an AI system as high-risk. Those rights include the right to human dignity,
respect for private and family life, protection of personal data, freedom of expression and
information, freedom of assembly and of association, and non-discrimination, consumer
protection, workers’ rights, rights of persons with disabilities, right to an effective remedy
and to a fair trial, right of defence and the presumption of innocence, right to good
administration. In addition to those rights, it is important to highlight that children have
specific rights as enshrined in Article 24 of the EU Charter and in the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of the Child (further elaborated in the UNCRC General Comment
No. 25 as regards the digital environment), both of which require consideration of the
children’s vulnerabilities and provision of such protection and care as necessary for their
well-being. The fundamental right to a high level of environmental protection enshrined in
the Charter and implemented in Union policies should also be considered when assessing the
severity of the harm that an AI system can cause, including in relation to the health and
safety of persons.

(29)  As regards high-risk AI systems that are safety components of products or systems, or which
are themselves products or systems falling within the scope of Regulation (EC) No 300/2008
of the European Parliament and of the Council10, Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council11, Regulation (EU) No 168/2013 of the European
Parliament and of the Council12, Directive 2014/90/EU of the European Parliament and of
the Council13, Directive (EU) 2016/797 of the European Parliament and of the Council14,
Regulation (EU) 2018/858 of the European Parliament and of the Council15, Regulation
(EU) 2018/1139 of the European Parliament and of the Council16, and Regulation (EU)
2019/2144 of the European Parliament and of the Council17, it is appropriate to amend those
acts to ensure that the Commission takes into account, on the basis of the technical and
regulatory specificities of each sector, and without interfering with existing governance,
conformity assessment and enforcement mechanisms and authorities established therein, the
mandatory requirements for high-risk AI systems laid down in this Regulation when
adopting any relevant future delegated or implementing acts on the basis of those acts.



(30)  As regards AI systems that are safety components of products, or which are themselves
products, falling within the scope of certain Union harmonisation legislation, it is
appropriate to classify them as high-risk under this Regulation if the product in question
undergoes the conformity assessment procedure with a third-party conformity assessment
body pursuant to that relevant Union harmonisation legislation. In particular, such products
are machinery, toys, lifts, equipment and protective systems intended for use in potentially
explosive atmospheres, radio equipment, pressure equipment, recreational craft equipment,
cableway installations, appliances burning gaseous fuels, medical devices, and in vitro
diagnostic medical devices.
(31)  The classification of an AI system as high-risk pursuant to this Regulation should not
necessarily mean that the product whose safety component is the AI system, or the AI
system itself as a product, is considered ‘high-risk’ under the criteria established in the
relevant Union harmonisation legislation that applies to the product. This is notably the case
for Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council18 and
Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European Parliament and of the Council19, where a third-
party conformity assessment is provided for medium-risk and high-risk products.


(32)  As regards high-risk AI systems other than those that are safety components of products, or
which are themselves products, it is appropriate to classify them as high-risk if, in the light
of their intended purpose, they pose a high risk of harm to the health and safety or the
fundamental rights of persons, taking into account both the severity of the possible harm and
its probability of occurrence, and they are used in a number of specifically pre-defined areas
specified in the Regulation. The identification of those systems is based on the same
methodology and criteria envisaged also for any future amendments of the list of high-risk
AI systems. It is also important to clarify that within the high-risk scenarios referred to in
Annex III there may be systems that do not lead to a significant risk to the legal interests
protected under those scenarios, taking into account the output produced by the AI system.
Therefore only when such output has a high degree of importance (i.e. is not purely
accessory) in respect of the relevant action or decision so as to generate a significant risk to
the legal interests protected, the AI system generating such output should be considered as
high-risk. For instance, when the information provided by an AI systems to the human
consists of the profiling of natural persons within the meaning of of Article 4(4) Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 and Article 3(4) of Directive (EU) 2016/680 and Article 3(5) of Regulation
(EU) 2018/1725, such information should not typically be considered of accessory nature in
the context of high risk AI systems as referred to in Annex III. However, if the output of the
AI system has only negligible or minor relevance for human action or decision, it may be
considered purely accessory, including  for example, AI systems used for translation for
informative purposes or for the management of documents.
(33)  Technical inaccuracies of AI systems intended for the remote biometric identification of
natural persons can lead to biased results and entail discriminatory effects. This is
particularly relevant when it comes to age, ethnicity, race, sex or disabilities. Therefore,
‘real-time’ and ‘post’ remote biometric identification systems should be classified as high-
risk. In view of the risks that they pose, both types of remote biometric identification
systems should be subject to specific requirements on logging capabilities and human
oversight.

(34)  As regards the management and operation of critical infrastructure, it is appropriate to
classify as high-risk the AI systems intended to be used as safety components in the
management and operation of critical digital infrastructure as listed in Annex I point 8 of the
Directive on the resilience of critical entities, road traffic and the supply of water, gas,
heating and electricity, since their failure or malfunctioning may put at risk the life and
health of persons at large scale and lead to appreciable disruptions in the ordinary conduct of
social and economic activities. Safety components of critical infrastructure, including
critical digital infrastrucure, are systems used to directly protect the physical integrity of
critical infrastructure or health and safety of persons and property but which are not
necessary in order for the system to function. Failure or malfunctioning of such components
might directly lead to risks to the physical integrity of critical infrastructure and thus to risks
to health and safety of persons and property. Components intended to be used solely for
cybersecurity purposes should not qualify as safety components. Examples of safety
components of such critical infrastructure may include systems for monitoring water
pressure or fire alarm controlling systems in cloud computing centres.
(35)  AI systems used in education or vocational training, notably for determining access,
admission or assigning persons to educational and vocational training institutions or
programmes at all levels or to evaluate learning outcomes of persons should be considered
high-risk, since they may determine the educational and professional course of a person’s
life and therefore affect their ability to secure their livelihood. When improperly designed
and used, such systems may violate the right to education and training as well as the right
not to be discriminated against and perpetuate historical patterns of discrimination.

(36)  AI systems used in employment, workers management and access to self-employment,
notably for the recruitment and selection of persons, for making decisions on promotion and
termination and for task allocation based on individual behavior or personal traits or
characteristics, monitoring or evaluation of persons in work-related contractual
relationships, should also be classified as high-risk, since those systems may appreciably
impact future career prospects and livelihoods of these persons. Relevant work-related
contractual relationships should involve employees and persons providing services through
platforms as referred to in the Commission Work Programme 2021. Such persons should in
principle not be considered users within the meaning of this Regulation. Throughout the
recruitment process and in the evaluation, promotion, or retention of persons in work-related
contractual relationships, such systems may perpetuate historical patterns of discrimination,
for example against women, certain age groups, persons with disabilities, or persons of
certain racial or ethnic origins or sexual orientation. AI systems used to monitor the
performance and behaviour of these persons may also impact their rights to data protection
and privacy.


(37)  Another area in which the use of AI systems deserves special consideration is the access to
and enjoyment of certain essential private and public services and benefits necessary for
people to fully participate in society or to improve one’s standard of living. In particular, AI
systems used to evaluate the credit score or creditworthiness of natural persons should be
classified as high-risk AI systems, since they determine those persons’ access to financial
resources or essential services such as housing, electricity, and telecommunication services.
AI systems used for this purpose may lead to discrimination of persons or groups and
perpetuate historical patterns of discrimination, for example based on racial or ethnic
origins, disabilities, age, sexual orientation, or create new forms of discriminatory impacts.
Considering the very limited scale of the impact and the available alternatives on the market,
it is appropriate to exempt AI systems for the purpose of creditworthiness assessment and
credit scoring when put into service by micro or small entreprises, as defined in the Annex
of Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC for their own use. Natural persons applying
for or receiving essential public assistance benefits and services from public authorities are
typically dependent on those benefits and services and in a vulnerable position in relation to
the responsible authorities. If AI systems are used for determining whether such benefits and
services should be denied, reduced, revoked or reclaimed by authorities, including whether
beneficiaries are legitimately entitled to such benefits or services, those systems may have a
significant impact on persons’ livelihood and may infringe their fundamental rights, such as
the right to social protection, non-discrimination, human dignity or an effective remedy.
Those systems should therefore be classified as high-risk. Nonetheless, this Regulation
should not hamper the development and use of innovative approaches in the public
administration, which would stand to benefit from a wider use of compliant and safe AI
systems, provided that those systems do not entail a high risk to legal and natural persons.
Finally, AI systems used to dispatch or establish priority in the dispatching of emergency
first response services should also be classified as high-risk since they make decisions in
very critical situations for the life and health of persons and their property. AI systems are
also increasingly used for risk assessment in relation to natural persons and pricing in the
case of life and health insurance which, if not duly designed, developed and used, can lead
to serious consequences for people’s life and health, including financial exclusion and
discrimination. To ensure a consistent approach within the financial services sector, the
above mentioned exception for micro or small enterprises for their own use should apply,
insofar as they themselves provide and put into service an AI system for the purpose of
selling their own insurance products.


38)  Actions by law enforcement authorities involving certain uses of AI systems are
characterised by a significant degree of power imbalance and may lead to surveillance, arrest
or deprivation of a natural person’s liberty as well as other adverse impacts on fundamental
rights guaranteed in the Charter. In particular, if the AI system is not trained with high
quality data, does not meet adequate requirements in terms of its accuracy or robustness, or
is not properly designed and tested before being put on the market or otherwise put into
service, it may single out people in a discriminatory or otherwise incorrect or unjust manner.
Furthermore, the exercise of important procedural fundamental rights, such as the right to an
effective remedy and to a fair trial as well as the right of defence and the presumption of
innocence, could be hampered, in particular, where such AI systems are not sufficiently
transparent, explainable and documented. It is therefore appropriate to classify as high-risk a
number of AI systems intended to be used in the law enforcement context where accuracy,
reliability and transparency is particularly important to avoid adverse impacts, retain public
trust and ensure accountability and effective redress. In view of the nature of the activities in
question and the risks relating thereto, those high-risk AI systems should include in
particular AI systems intended to be used by law enforcement authorities for individual risk
assessments, polygraphs and similar tools or to detect the emotional state of natural person,
for the evaluation of the reliability of evidence in criminal proceedings, for predicting the
occurrence or reoccurrence of an actual or potential criminal offence based on profiling of
natural persons, or assessing personality traits and characteristics or past criminal behaviour
of natural persons or groups, for profiling in the course of detection, investigation or
prosecution of criminal offences. AI systems specifically intended to be used for
administrative proceedings by tax and customs authorities as well as by financial
intelligence units carrying out adminstrative tasks analysing information pursuant to Union
anti-money laundering legislation should not be considered high-risk AI systems used by
law enforcement authorities for the purposes of prevention, detection, investigation and
prosecution of criminal offences.


(39)  AI systems used in migration, asylum and border control management affect people who are
often in particularly vulnerable position and who are dependent on the outcome of the
actions of the competent public authorities. The accuracy, non-discriminatory nature and
transparency of the AI systems used in those contexts are therefore particularly important to
guarantee the respect of the fundamental rights of the affected persons, notably their rights
to free movement, non-discrimination, protection of private life and personal data,
international protection and good administration. It is therefore appropriate to classify as
high-risk AI systems intended to be used by the competent public authorities charged with
tasks in the fields of migration, asylum and border control management as polygraphs and
similar tools or to detect the emotional state of a natural person; for assessing certain risks
posed by natural persons entering the territory of a Member State or applying for visa or
asylum; for assisting competent public authorities for the examination of applications for
asylum, visa and residence permits and associated complaints with regard to the objective to
establish the eligibility of the natural persons applying for a status. AI systems in the area of
migration, asylum and border control management covered by this Regulation should
comply with the relevant procedural requirements set by the Directive 2013/32/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council20, the Regulation (EC) No 810/2009 of the
European Parliament and of the Council21 and other relevant legislation.


(40)  Certain AI systems intended for the administration of justice and democratic processes
should be classified as high-risk, considering their potentially significant impact on
democracy, rule of law, individual freedoms as well as the right to an effective remedy and
to a fair trial. In particular, to address the risks of potential biases, errors and opacity, it is
appropriate to qualify as high-risk AI systems intended to assist judicial authorities in
interpreting facts and the law and in applying the law to a concrete set of facts. Such
qualification should not extend, however, to AI systems intended for purely ancillary
administrative activities that do not affect the actual administration of justice in individual
cases, such as anonymisation or pseudonymisation of judicial decisions, documents or data,
communication between personnel, administrative tasks.
(41)  The fact that an AI system is classified as high risk under this Regulation should not be
interpreted as indicating that the use of the system is lawful under other acts of Union law or
under national law compatible with Union law, such as on the protection of personal data, on
the use of polygraphs and similar tools or other systems to detect the emotional state of
natural persons. Any such use should continue to occur solely in accordance with the
applicable requirements resulting from the Charter and from the applicable acts of secondary
Union law and national law. This Regulation should not be understood as providing for the
legal ground for processing of personal data, including special categories of personal data,
where relevant, unless it is specifically provided for otherwise in this Regulation.
(42)  To mitigate the risks from high-risk AI systems placed or otherwise put into service on the
Union market, certain mandatory requirements should apply, taking into account the
intended purpose of the use of the system and according to the risk management system to
be established by the provider. In particular, the risk management system should consist of a
continuous iterative process planned and run throughout the entire lifecycle of a high-risk AI
system. This process should ensure that the provider identifies and analyses the risks to the
health, safety and fundamental rights of the persons who may be affected by the system in
light of its intended purpose, including the possible risks arising from the interaction
between the AI system and the environment within which it operates, and accordingly
adopts suitable risk management measures in the light of state of the art.


(43)  Requirements should apply to high-risk AI systems as regards the quality of data sets used,
technical documentation and record-keeping, transparency and the provision of information
to users, human oversight, and robustness, accuracy and cybersecurity. Those requirements
are necessary to effectively mitigate the risks for health, safety and fundamental rights, as
applicable in the light of the intended purpose of the system, and no other less trade
restrictive measures are reasonably available, thus avoiding unjustified restrictions to trade.
(44)  High data quality is essential for the performance of many AI systems, especially when
techniques involving the training of models are used, with a view to ensure that the high-risk
AI system performs as intended and safely and it does not become the source of
discrimination prohibited by Union law. High quality training, validation and testing data
sets require the implementation of appropriate data governance and management practices.
Training, validation and testing data sets should be sufficiently relevant, representative and
have the appropriate statistical properties, including as regards the persons or groups of
persons on which the high-risk AI system is intended to be used. These datasets should also
be as free of errors and complete as possible in view of the intended purpose of the AI
system, taking into account, in a proportionate manner, technical feasibility and state of the
art, the availability of data and the implementation of appropriate risk management measures
so that possible shortcomings of the datasets  are duly addressed. The requirement for the
datasets to be complete and free of errors should not affect the use of privacy-preserving
techniques in the context of the the development and testing of AI systems. Training,
validation and testing data sets should take into account, to the extent required by their
intended purpose, the features, characteristics or elements that are particular to the specific
geographical, behavioural or functional setting or context within which the AI system is
intended to be used. In order to protect the right of others from the discrimination that might
result from the bias in AI systems, the providers should be able to process also special
categories of personal data, as a matter of substantial public interest within the meaning of
Article 9(2)(g) of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 and Article 10(2)g) of Regulation (EU)
2018/1725, in order to ensure the bias monitoring, detection and correction in relation to
high-risk AI systems.


(44a)  When applying the principles referred to in Article 5(1)(c) of Regulation 2016/679 and
Article 4(1)(c) of Regulation 2018/1725, in particular the principle of data minimisation, in
regard to training, validation and testing data sets under this Regulation, due regard should
be had to the full life cycle of the AI system.
(45)  For the development of high-risk AI systems, certain actors, such as providers, notified
bodies and other relevant entities, such as digital innovation hubs, testing experimentation
facilities and researchers, should be able to access and use high quality datasets within their
respective fields of activities which are related to this Regulation. European common data
spaces established by the Commission and the facilitation of data sharing between
businesses and with government in the public interest will be instrumental to provide
trustful, accountable and non-discriminatory access to high quality data for the training,
validation and testing of AI systems. For example, in health, the European health data space
will facilitate non-discriminatory access to health data and the training of artificial
intelligence algorithms on those datasets, in a privacy-preserving, secure, timely, transparent
and trustworthy manner, and with an appropriate institutional governance. Relevant
competent authorities, including sectoral ones, providing or supporting the access to data
may also support the provision of high-quality data for the training, validation and testing of
AI systems.
(46)  Having information on how high-risk AI systems have been developed and how they
perform throughout their lifecycle is essential to verify compliance with the requirements
under this Regulation. This requires keeping records and the availability of a technical
documentation, containing information which is necessary to assess the compliance of the
AI system with the relevant requirements. Such information should include the general
characteristics, capabilities and limitations of the system, algorithms, data, training, testing
and validation processes used as well as documentation on the relevant risk management
system. The technical documentation should be kept up to date. Furthermore, providers or
users should keep logs automatically generated by the high-risk AI system, including for
instance output data, start date and time etc., to the extent that such a system and the related
logs are under their control, for a period that is appropriate to enable them to fulfil their
obligations.


(47)  To address the opacity that may make certain AI systems incomprehensible to or too
complex for natural persons, a certain degree of transparency should be required for high-
risk AI systems. Users should be able to interpret the system output and use it appropriately.
High-risk AI systems should therefore be accompanied by relevant documentation and
instructions of use and include concise and clear information, including in relation to
possible risks to fundamental rights and discrimination of the persons who may be affected
by the system in light of its intended purpose, where appropriate. To facilitate the
understanding of the instructions of use by users, they should contain illustrative examples,
as appropriate.
(48)  High-risk AI systems should be designed and developed in such a way that natural persons
can oversee their functioning. For this purpose, appropriate human oversight measures
should be identified by the provider of the system before its placing on the market or putting
into service. In particular, where appropriate, such measures should guarantee that the
system is subject to in-built operational constraints that cannot be overridden by the system
itself and is responsive to the human operator, and that the natural persons to whom human
oversight has been assigned have the necessary competence, training and authority to carry
out that role. Considering the significant consequences for persons in case of incorrect
matches by certain biometric identification systems, it is appropriate to provide for an
enhanced human oversight requirement for those systems so that no action or decision may
be taken by the user on the basis of the identification resulting from the system unless this
has been separately verified and confirmed by at least two natural persons. Those persons
could be from one or more entities and include the person operating or using the system.
This requirement should not pose unnecessary burden or delays and it could be sufficient
that the separate verifications by the different persons are automatically recorded in the logs
generated by the system.
(49)  High-risk AI systems should perform consistently throughout their lifecycle and meet an
appropriate level of accuracy, robustness and cybersecurity in accordance with the generally
acknowledged state of the art. The level of accuracy and accuracy metrics should be
communicated to the users.


(50)  The technical robustness is a key requirement for high-risk AI systems. They should be
resilient in relation to harmful or otherwise undesirable behaviour that may result from
limitations within the systems or the environment in which the systems operate (e.g. errors,
faults, inconsistencies, unexpected situations). High-risk AI systems should therefore be
designed and developed with appropriate technical solutions to prevent or minimize that
harmful or otherwise undesirable behaviour, such as for instance mechanisms enabling the
system to safely interrupt its operation (fail-safe plans) in the presence of certain anomalies
or when operation takes place outside certain predetermined boundaries. Failure to protect
against these risks could lead to safety impacts or negatively affect the fundamental rights,
for example due to erroneous decisions or wrong or biased outputs generated by the AI
system.
 (51)  Cybersecurity plays a crucial role in ensuring that AI systems are resilient against attempts
to alter their use, behaviour, performance or compromise their security properties by
malicious third parties exploiting the system’s vulnerabilities. Cyberattacks against AI
systems can leverage AI specific assets, such as training data sets (e.g. data poisoning) or
trained models (e.g. adversarial attacks), or exploit vulnerabilities in the AI system’s digital
assets or the underlying ICT infrastructure. To ensure a level of cybersecurity appropriate to
the risks, suitable measures should therefore be taken by the providers of high-risk AI
systems, also taking into account as appropriate the underlying ICT infrastructure.


(52)  As part of Union harmonisation legislation, rules applicable to the placing on the market,
putting into service and use of high-risk AI systems should be laid down consistently with
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council22 setting out
the requirements for accreditation and the market surveillance of products, Decision No
768/2008/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council23 on a common framework for
the marketing of products and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 of the European Parliament and
of the Council24 on market surveillance and compliance of products (‘New Legislative
Framework for the marketing of products’).
(52a)  In line with New Legislative Framework principles, specific obligations for relevant
operators within the AI value chain should be set to ensure legal certainty and facilitate
compliance with this Regulation. In certain situations those operators could act in more than
one role at the same time and should therefore fufil cumulatively all relevant obligations
associated with those roles. For example, an operator could act as a distributor and an
importer at the same time.
(53)  It is appropriate that a specific natural or legal person, defined as the provider, takes the
responsibility for the placing on the market or putting into service of a high-risk AI system,
regardless of whether that natural or legal person is the person who designed or developed
the system.


(54)  The provider should establish a sound quality management system, ensure the
accomplishment of the required conformity assessment procedure, draw up the relevant
documentation and establish a robust post-market monitoring system. Public authorities
which put into service high-risk AI systems for their own use may adopt and implement the
rules for the quality management system as part of the quality management system adopted
at a national or regional level, as appropriate, taking into account the specificities of the
sector and the competences and organisation of the public authority in question.
(54a)  To ensure legal certainty, it is necessary to clarify that, under certain specific conditions, any
natural or legal person should be considered a provider of a new high-risk AI system and
therefore assume all the relevant obligations. For example, this would be the case if that
person puts its name or trademark on a high-risk AI system already placed on the market or
put into service, or if that person modifies the intended purpose of an AI system which is not
high-risk and is already placed on the market or put into service, in a way that makes the
modified system a high-risk AI system. These provisions should apply without prejudice to
more specific provisions established in certain New Legislative Framework sectorial
legislation with which this Regulation should apply jointly. For example, Article 16,
paragraph 2 of Regulation 745/2017, establishing that certain changes should not be
considered modifications of a device that could affect its compliance with the applicable
requirements, should continue to apply to high-risk AI systems that are medical devices
within the meaning of that Regulation.
(55)  Where a high-risk AI system that is a safety component of a product which is covered by a
relevant New Legislative Framework sectorial legislation is not placed on the market or put
into service independently from the product, the product manufacturer as defined under the
relevant New Legislative Framework legislation should comply with the obligations of the
provider established in this Regulation and notably ensure that the AI system embedded in
the final product complies with the requirements of this Regulation.


(56)  To enable enforcement of this Regulation and create a level-playing field for operators, and
taking into account the different forms of making available of digital products, it is
important to ensure that, under all circumstances, a person established in the Union can
provide authorities with all the necessary information on the compliance of an AI system.
Therefore, prior to making their AI systems available in the Union, where an importer
cannot be identified, providers established outside the Union shall, by written mandate,
appoint an authorised representative established in the Union.
(56a)  For providers who are not established in the Union, the authorised representative plays a
pivotal role in ensuring the compliance of the high-risk AI systems placed on the market or
put into service in the Union by those providers and in serving as their contact person
established in the Union. Given that pivotal role, and in order to ensure that responsibility is
assumed for the purposes of enforcement of this Regulation, it is appropriate to make the
authorised representative jointly and severally liable with the provider for defective high-
risk AI systems. The liability of the authorised representative provided for in this Regulation
is without prejudice to the provisions of Directive 85/374/EEC on liability for defective
products.
(57)  [deleted]
(58)  Given the nature of AI systems and the risks to safety and fundamental rights possibly
associated with their use, including as regard the need to ensure proper monitoring of the
performance of an AI system in a real-life setting, it is appropriate to set specific
responsibilities for users. Users should in particular use high-risk AI systems in accordance
with the instructions of use and certain other obligations should be provided for with regard
to monitoring of the functioning of the AI systems and with regard to record-keeping, as
appropriate. These obligations should be without prejudice to other user obligations in
relation to high-risk AI systems under Union or national law, and should not apply where
the use is made in the course of a personal non-professional activity.


(58a)  It is appropriate to clarify that this Regulation does not affect the obligations of providers
and users of AI systems in their role as data controllers or processors stemming from Union
law on the protection of personal data in so far as the design, the development or the use of
AI systems involves the processing of personal data. It is also appropriate to clarify that data
subjects continue to enjoy all the rights and guarantees awarded to them by such Union law,
including the rights related to solely automated individual decision-making, including
profiling. Harmonised rules for the placing on the market, the putting into service and the
use of AI systems established under this Regulation should facilitate the effective
implementation and enable the exercise of the data subjects’ rights and other remedies
guaranteed under Union law on the protection of personal data and of other fundamental
rights.
(59)  [deleted]
(60)  [deleted]

(61)  Standardisation should play a key role to provide technical solutions to providers to ensure
compliance with this Regulation, in line with the state of the art. Compliance with
harmonised standards as defined in Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 of the European
Parliament and of the Council25, which are normally expected to reflect the state of the
art,should be a means for providers to demonstrate conformity with the requirements of this
Regulation. However, in the absence of relevant references to harmonised standards, the
Commission should be able to establish, via implementing acts, common specifications for
certain requirements under this Regulation as an exceptional fall back solution to facilitate
the provider’s obligation to comply with the requirements of this Regulation, when the
standardisation process is blocked or when there are delays in the establishment of an
appropriate harmonised standard. If such delay is due to the technical complexity of the
standard in question, this should be considered by the Commission before contemplating the
establishment of common specifications. An appropriate involvement of small and medium
enterprises in the elaboration of standards supporting the implementation of this Regulation
is essential to promote innovation and competitiveness in the field of artificial intelligence
within the Union. Such involvement should be appropriately ensured in accordance with
Article 5 and 6 of Regulation 1025/2012.


(61a)  It is appropriate that, without prejudice to the use of harmonised standards and common
specifications, providers benefit from a presumption of conformity with the relevant
requirement on data when their high-risk AI system has been trained and tested on data
reflecting the specific geographical, behavioural or functional setting within which the AI
system is intended to be used. Similarly, in line with Article 54(3) of Regulation (EU)
2019/881 of the European Parliament and of the Council, high-risk AI systems that have
been certified or for which a statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity
scheme pursuant to that Regulation and the references of which have been published in the
Official Journal of the European Union should be presumed to be in compliance with the
cybersecurity requirement of this Regulation. This remains without prejudice to the
voluntary nature of that cybersecurity scheme.
(62)  In order to ensure a high level of trustworthiness of high-risk AI systems, those systems
should be subject to a conformity assessment prior to their placing on the market or putting
into service.


(63)  It is appropriate that, in order to minimise the burden on operators and avoid any possible
duplication, for high-risk AI systems related to products which are covered by existing
Union harmonisation legislation following the New Legislative Framework approach, the
compliance of those AI systems with the requirements of this Regulation should be assessed
as part of the conformity assessment already foreseen under that legislation. The
applicability of the requirements of this Regulation should thus not affect the specific logic,
methodology or general structure of conformity assessment under the relevant specific New
Legislative Framework legislation. This approach is fully reflected in the interplay between
this Regulation and the [Machinery Regulation]. While safety risks of AI systems ensuring
safety functions in machinery are addressed by the requirements of this Regulation, certain
specific requirements in the [Machinery Regulation] will ensure the safe integration of the
AI system into the overall machinery, so as not to compromise the safety of the machinery
as a whole. The [Machinery Regulation] applies the same definition of AI system as this
Regulation. With regard to high-risk AI systems related to products covered by Regulations
745/2017 and 746/2017 on medical devices, the applicability of the requirements of this
Regulation should be without prejudice and take into account the risk management logic and
benefit-risk assessment performed under the medical device framework.
(64)  Given the more extensive experience of professional pre-market certifiers in the field of
product safety and the different nature of risks involved, it is appropriate to limit, at least in
an initial phase of application of this Regulation, the scope of application of third-party
conformity assessment for high-risk AI systems other than those related to products.
Therefore, the conformity assessment of such systems should be carried out as a general rule
by the provider under its own responsibility, with the only exception of AI systems intended
to be used for the remote biometric identification of persons, for which the involvement of a
notified body in the conformity assessment should be foreseen, to the extent they are not
prohibited.


(65)  In order to carry out third-party conformity assessment for AI systems intended to be used
for the remote biometric identification of persons, notified bodies should be notified under
this Regulation by the national competent authorities, provided they are compliant with a set
of requirements, notably on independence, competence and absence of conflicts of interests.
Notification of those bodies should be sent by national competent authorities to the
Commission and the other Member States by means of the electronic notification tool
developed and managed by the Commission pursuant to Article R23 of Decision 768/2008.
(66)  In line with the commonly established notion of substantial modification for products
regulated by Union harmonisation legislation, it is appropriate that whenever a change
occurs which may affect the compliance of a high risk AI system with this Regulation (e.g.
change of operating system or software architecture), or when the intended purpose of the
system changes, that AI system should be considered a new AI system which should
undergo a new conformity assessment. However, changes occuring to the algorithm and the
performance of AI systems which continue to ‘learn’ after being placed on the market or put
into service (i.e. automatically adapting how functions are carried out) should not constitute
a substantial modification, provided that those changes have been pre-determined by the
provider and assessed at the moment of the conformity assessment.
(67)  High-risk AI systems should bear the CE marking to indicate their conformity with this
Regulation so that they can move freely within the internal market. Member States should
not create unjustified obstacles to the placing on the market or putting into service of high-
risk AI systems that comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation and bear the
CE marking.
(68)  Under certain conditions, rapid availability of innovative technologies may be crucial for
health and safety of persons and for society as a whole. It is thus appropriate that under
exceptional reasons of public security or protection of life and health of natural persons and
the protection of industrial and commercial property, Member States could authorise the
placing on the market or putting into service of AI systems which have not undergone a
conformity assessment.


(69)  In order to facilitate the work of the Commission and the Member States in the artificial
intelligence field as well as to increase the transparency towards the public, providers of
high-risk AI systems other than those related to products falling within the scope of relevant
existing Union harmonisation legislation, should be required to register themselves and
information about their high-risk AI system in a EU database, to be established and managed
by the Commission. Before using a high-risk AI system listed in Annex III, users of high-
risk AI systems that are public authorities, agencies or bodies, with the exception of law
enforcement, border control, immigration or asylum authorities, and authorities that are
users of high-risk AI systems in the area of critical infrastructure shall also register
themselves in such database and select the system that they envisage to use. The
Commission should be the controller of that database, in accordance with Regulation (EU)
2018/1725 of the European Parliament and of the Council26. In order to ensure the full
functionality of the database, when deployed, the procedure for setting the database should
include the elaboration of functional specifications by the Commission and an independent
audit report.


(70)  Certain AI systems intended to interact with natural persons or to generate content may pose
specific risks of impersonation or deception irrespective of whether they qualify as high-risk
or not. In certain circumstances, the use of these systems should therefore be subject to
specific transparency obligations without prejudice to the requirements and obligations for
high-risk AI systems. In particular, natural persons should be notified that they are
interacting with an AI system, unless this is obvious from the point of view of a natural
person who is reasonably well-informed, observant and circumspect taking into account   the
circumstances and the context of use. When implementing such obligation, the
characteristics of individuals belonging to vulnerable groups due to their age or disability
should be taken into account to the extent the AI system is intended to interact with those
groups as well. Moreover, natural persons should be notified when they are exposed to
systems that, by processing their biometric data, can identify or infer the emotions or
intentions of those persons or assign them to specific categories. Such specific categories
can relate to aspects such as sex, age, hair colour, eye colour, tatoos, personal traits, ethnic
origin, personal preferences and interests or to other aspects such as sexual or political
orientation. Such information and notifications should be provided in accessible formats for
persons with disabilities. Further, users, who use an AI system to generate or manipulate
image, audio or video content that appreciably resembles existing persons, places or events
and would falsely appear to a person to be authentic, should disclose that the content has
been artificially created or manipulated by labelling the artificial intelligence output
accordingly and disclosing its artificial origin. The compliance with the information
obligations referred to above should not be interpreted as indicating that the use of the
system or its output is lawful under this Regulation or other Union and Member State law
and should be without prejudice to other transparency obligations for users of AI systems
laid down in Union or national law. Furthermore it should also not be interpreted as
indicating that the use of the system or its output impedes the right to freedom of expression
and the right to freedom of the arts and sciences guaranteed in the Charter of Funadamental
Rights of the EU, in particular where the content is part of an evidently creative, satirical,
artistic or fictional work or programme, subject to appropriate safeguards for the rights and
freedoms of third parties.

(71)  Artificial intelligence is a rapidly developing family of technologies that requires novel
forms of regulatory oversight and a safe space for experimentation, while ensuring
responsible innovation and integration of appropriate safeguards and risk mitigation
measures. To ensure a legal framework that is innovation-friendly, future-proof and resilient
to disruption, national competent authorities from one or more Member States should be
encouraged to establish artificial intelligence regulatory sandboxes to facilitate the
development and testing of innovative AI systems under strict regulatory oversight before
these systems are placed on the market or otherwise put into service.


(72)  The objectives of the AI regulatory sandboxes should be to foster AI innovation by
establishing a controlled experimentation and testing environment in the development and
pre-marketing phase with a view to ensuring compliance of the innovative AI systems  with
this Regulation and other relevant Union and Member States legislation; to enhance legal
certainty for innovators and the competent authorities’ oversight and understanding of the
opportunities, emerging risks and the impacts of AI use, and to accelerate access to markets,
including by removing barriers for small and medium enterprises (SMEs), including start-
ups. The participation in the AI regulatory sandbox should focus on issues that raise legal
uncertainty for providers and prospective providers to innovate, experiment with AI in the
Union and contribute to evidence-based regulatory learning. The supervision of the AI
systems in the AI regulatory sandbox should therefore cover their development, training,
testing and validation before the systems are placed on the market or put into service, as well
as the notion and occurrence of substantial modification that may require a new conformity
assessment procedure. Where appropriate, national competent authorities establishing AI
regulatory sandboxes should cooperate with other relevant  authorities, including those
supervising the protection of fundamental rights, and could allow for the involvement of
other actors within the AI ecosystem such as national or European standardisation
organisations, notified bodies, testing and experimentation facilities, research and
experimentation labs, innovation hubs and relevant stakeholder and civil society
organisations. To ensure uniform implementation across the Union and economies of scale,
it is appropriate to establish common rules for the regulatory sandboxes’ implementation
and a framework for cooperation between the relevant authorities involved in the
supervision of the sandboxes. AI regulatory sandboxes established under this Regulation
should be without prejudice to other legislation allowing for the establishment of other
sandboxes aiming at ensuring compliance with legislation other that this Regulation. Where
appropriate, relevant competent authorities in charge of those other regulatory sandboxes
should consider the benefits of using those sandboxes also for the purpose of ensuring
compliance of AI systems with this Regulation. Upon agreement between the national
competent authorities and the participants in the AI regulatory sandbox, testing in real world
conditions may also be operated and supervised in the framework of the AI regulatory
sandbox.


(-72a)  This Regulation should provide the legal basis for the participants in the AI regulatory
sandbox to use personal data collected for other purposes for developing certain AI systems
in the public interest within the AI regulatory sandbox, in line with Article 6(4) and 9(2)(g)
of Regulation (EU) 2016/679, and Article 5 and 10 of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725, and
without prejudice to Articles 4(2) and 10 of Directive (EU) 2016/680. All other obligations
of data controllers and rights of data subjects under Regulation (EU) 2016/679, Regulation
(EU) 2018/1725 and Directive (EU) 2016/680 remain applicable. In particular, this
Regulation should not provide a legal basis in the meaning of Article 22(2)(b) of Regulation
(EU) 2016/679 and Article 24(2)(b) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725. Participants in the
sandbox should ensure appropriate safeguards and cooperate with the competent authorities,
including by following their guidance and acting expeditiously and in good faith to mitigate
any high-risks to safety and fundamental rights that may arise during the development and
experimentation in the sandbox. The conduct of the participants in the sandbox should be
taken into account when competent authorities decide whether to impose an administrative
fine under Article 83(2) of Regulation 2016/679 and Article 57 of Directive 2016/680.
(72a)  In order to accelerate the process of development and placing on the market of high-risk AI
systems listed in Annex III, it is important that providers or prospective providers of such
systems may also benefit from a specific regime for testing those systems in real world
conditions, without participating in an AI regulatory sandbox. However, in such cases and
taking into account the possible consequences of such testing on individuals, it should be
ensured that appropriate and sufficient guarantees and conditions are introduced by the
Regulation for providers or prospective providers. Such guarantees should include, among
others, requesting informed consent of natural persons to participate in testing in real world
conditions, with the exception of law enforcement in cases where the seeking of informed
consent would prevent the AI system from being tested. Consent of subjects to participate in
such testing under this Regulation is distinct from and without prejudice to consent of data
subjects for the processing of their personal data under the relevant data protection law.


(73)  In order to promote and protect innovation, it is important that the interests of SME
providers and users of AI systems are taken into particular account. To this objective,
Member States should develop initiatives, which are targeted at those operators, including
on awareness raising and information communication. Moreover, the specific interests and
needs of SME providers shall be taken into account when notified bodies set conformity
assessment fees. Translation costs related to mandatory documentation and communication
with authorities may constitute a significant cost for providers and other operators, notably
those of a smaller scale. Member States should possibly ensure that one of the languages
determined and accepted by them for relevant providers’ documentation and for
communication with operators is one which is broadly understood by the largest possible
number of cross-border users.
(73a)  In order to promote and protect innovation, the AI-on demand platform, all relevant EU
funding programmes and projects, such as Digital Europe Programme, Horizon Europe,
implemented by the Commission and the Member States at national or EU level should
contribute to the achievement of the objectives of this Regulation.
(74)  In particular, in order to minimise the risks to implementation resulting from lack of
knowledge and expertise in the market as well as to facilitate compliance of providers,
notably SMEs, and notified bodies with their obligations under this Regulation, the AI-on
demand platform, the European Digital Innovation Hubs and the Testing and
Experimentation Facilities established by the Commission and the Member States at national
or EU level should possibly contribute to the implementation of this Regulation. Within
their respective mission and fields of competence, they may provide in particular technical
and scientific support to providers and notified bodies.
(74a)  Moreover, in order to ensure proportionality considering the very small size of some
operators regarding costs of innovation, it is appropriate to exempt microenterprises from
the most costly obligations, such as to establish a quality management system which would
reduce the administrative burden and the costs for those enterprises without affecting the
level of protection and the need for compliance with the requirements for high-risk AI
systems.


(75)  It is appropriate that the Commission facilitates, to the extent possible, access to Testing and
Experimentation Facilities to bodies, groups or laboratories established or accredited
pursuant to any relevant Union harmonisation legislation and which fulfil tasks in the
context of conformity assessment of products or devices covered by that Union
harmonisation legislation. This is notably the case for expert panels, expert laboratories and
reference laboratories in the field of medical devices pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2017/745
and Regulation (EU) 2017/746.

(76)  In order to facilitate a smooth, effective and harmonised implementation of this Regulation a
European Artificial Intelligence Board should be established. The Board should reflect the
various interests of the AI eco-system and be composed of representatives of the Member
States. In order to ensure the involvement of relevant stakeholders, a standing subgroup of
the Board should be created. The Board should be responsible for a number of advisory
tasks, including issuing opinions, recommendations, advice or contributing to guidance on
matters related to the implementation of this Regulation, including on enforcement matters,
technical specifications or existing standards regarding the requirements established in this
Regulation and providing advice to the Commission and the Member States and their
national competent authorities on specific questions related to artificial intelligence. In order
to give some flexibility to Member States in the designation of their representatives in the AI
Board, such representatives may be any persons belonging to public entities who should
have the relevant competences and powers to facilitate coordination at national level and
contribute to the achievement of the Board's tasks. The Board should establish two standing
sub-groups to provide a platform for cooperation and exchange among market surveillance
authorities and notifying authorities on issues related respectively to market surveillance and
notified bodies. The standing subgroup for market surveillance should act as the
Administrative Cooperation Group (ADCO) for this Regulation in the meaning of Article 30
of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020. In line with the role and tasks of the Commission pursuant to
Article 33 of Regulation (EU) 2019/1020, the Commission should support the activities of
the standing subgroup for market surveillance by undertaking market evaluations or studies,
notably with a view to identifying aspects of this Regulation requiring specific and urgent
coordination among market surveillance authorities. The Board may establish other standing
or temporary sub-groups as appropriate for the purpose of examining specific issues. The
Board should also cooperate, as appropriate, with relevant EU bodies, experts groups and
networks active in the context of relevant EU legislation, including in particular those active
under relevant EU regulation on data, digital products and services.


(76a)  The Commission should actively support the Member States and operators in the
implementation and enforcement of this Regulation. In this regard it should develop
guidelines on particular topics aiming at facilitating the application of this Regulation, while
paying particular attention to the needs of SMEs and start-us in sectors most likely to be
affected. In order to support adequate enforcement and the capacities of the Member States,
Union testing facilities on AI and a pool of relevant experts should be established and made
available to the Member States.
(77)  Member States hold a key role in the application and enforcement of this Regulation. In this
respect, each Member State should designate one or more national competent authorities for
the purpose of supervising the application and implementation of this Regulation. Member
States may decide to appoint any kind of public entity to perform the tasks of the national
competent authorities within the meaning of this Regulation, in accordance with their
specific national organisational characteristics and needs.
(78)  In order to ensure that providers of high-risk AI systems can take into account the
experience on the use of high-risk AI systems for improving their systems and the design
and development process or can take any possible corrective action in a timely manner, all
providers should have a post-market monitoring system in place. This system is also key to
ensure that the possible risks emerging from AI systems which continue to ‘learn’ after
being placed on the market or put into service can be more efficiently and timely addressed.
In this context, providers should also be required to have a system in place to report to the
relevant authorities any serious incidents resulting from the use of their AI systems.

(79)  In order to ensure an appropriate and effective enforcement of the requirements and
obligations set out by this Regulation, which is Union harmonisation legislation, the system
of market surveillance and compliance of products established by Regulation (EU)
2019/1020 should apply in its entirety. Market surveillance authorities designated pursuant
to this Regulation should have all enforcement powers under this Regulation and Regulation
(EU) 2019/1020 and should exercise their powers and carry out their duties independently,
impartially and without bias.  Although the majority of AI systems are not subject to specific
requirements and obligations under this Regualtion, market surveillance authorities may take
measures in relation to all AI systems when they present a risk in accordance with this
Regulation. Due to the specific nature of Union institutions, agencies and bodies falling
within the scope of this Regulation, it is appropriate to designate the European Data
Protection Supervisor as a competent market surveillance authority for them. This should be
without prejudice to the designation of national competent authorities by the Member States.
Market surveillance activities should not affect the ability of the supervised entities to carry
out their tasks independently, when such independence is required by Union law.
(79a)  This Regulation is without prejudice to the competences, tasks, powers and independence of
relevant national public authorities or bodies which supervise the application of Union law
protecting fundamental rights, including equality bodies and data protection authorities.
Where necessary for their mandate, those national public authorities or bodies should also
have access to any documentation created under this Regulation. A specific safeguard
procedure should be set for ensuring adequate and timely enforcement against AI systems
presenting a risk to health, safety and fundamental rights. The procedure for such AI
systems presenting a risk should be applied to high-risk AI systems presenting a risk,
prohibited systems which have been placed on the market, put into service or used in
violation of the prohibited practices laid down in this Regulation and AI systems which have
been made available in violation of the transparency requirements laid down in this
Regulation and present a risk.


(80)  Union legislation on financial services includes internal governance and risk management
rules and requirements which are applicable to regulated financial institutions in the course
of provision of those services, including when they make use of AI systems. In order to
ensure coherent application and enforcement of the obligations under this Regulation and
relevant rules and requirements of the Union financial services legislation, the authorities
responsible for the supervision and enforcement of the financial services legislation should
be designated as competent authorities for the purpose of supervising the implementation of
this Regulation, including for market surveillance activities, as regards AI systems provided
or used by regulated and supervised financial institutions unless Member States decide to
designate another authority to fulfill these market surveillance tasks. Those competent
authorities should have all powers under this Regulation and Regulation (EU) 2019/1020 on
market surveillance to enforce the requirements and obligations of this Regulation, including
powers to carry our ex post market surveillance activities that can be integrated, as
appropriate, into their existing supervisory mechanisms and procedures under the relevant
Union financial services legislation. It is appropriate to envisage that, when acting as market
surveillance authorities under this Regulation, the national authorities responsible for the
supervision of credit institutions regulated under Directive 2013/36/EU, which are
participating in the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) established by Council
Regulation No 1024/2013, should report, without delay, to the European Central Bank any
information identified in the course of their market surveillance activities that may be of
potential interest for the European Central Bank’s prudential supervisory tasks as specified
in that Regulation. To further enhance the consistency between this Regulation and the rules
applicable to credit institutions regulated under Directive 2013/36/EU of the European
Parliament and of the Council27, it is also appropriate to integrate some of the providers’
procedural obligations in relation to risk management, post marketing monitoring and
documentation into the existing obligations and procedures under Directive 2013/36/EU. In
order to avoid overlaps, limited derogations should also be envisaged in relation to the
quality management system of providers and the monitoring obligation placed on users of
high-risk AI systems to the extent that these apply to credit institutions regulated by
Directive 2013/36/EU. The same regime should apply to insurance and re-insurance
undertakings and insurance holding companies under Directive 2009/138/EU (Solvency II)
and the insurance intermediaries under Directive 2016/97/EU and other types of financial
institutions subject to requirements regarding internal governance, arrangements or
processes established pursuant to the relevant Union financial services legislation to ensure
consistency and equal treatment in the financial sector.
(81)  The development of AI systems other than high-risk AI systems in accordance with the
requirements of this Regulation may lead to a larger uptake of trustworthy artificial
intelligence in the Union. Providers of non-high-risk AI systems should be encouraged to
create codes of conduct intended to foster the voluntary application of the requirements
applicable to high-risk AI systems, adapted in light of the intended purpose of the systems
and the lower risk involved. Providers should also be encouraged to apply on a voluntary
basis additional requirements related, for example, to environmental sustainability,
accessibility to persons with disability, stakeholders’ participation in the design and
development of AI systems, and diversity of the development teams. The Commission may
develop initiatives, including of a sectorial nature, to facilitate the lowering of technical
barriers hindering cross-border exchange of data for AI development, including on data
access infrastructure, semantic and technical interoperability of different types of data.
(82)  It is important that AI systems related to products that are not high-risk in accordance with
this Regulation and thus are not required to comply with the requirements set out herein are
nevertheless safe when placed on the market or put into service. To contribute to this
objective, the Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council28  would
apply as a safety net.
(83)  In order to ensure trustful and constructive cooperation of competent authorities on Union
and national level, all parties involved in the application of this Regulation should respect
the confidentiality of information and data obtained in carrying out their tasks, in accordance
with Union or national law.
(84)  Member States should take all necessary measures to ensure that the provisions of this
Regulation are implemented, including by laying down effective, proportionate and
dissuasive penalties for their infringement, and in respect of the ne bis in idem principle. For
certain specific infringements, Member States should take into account the margins and
criteria set out in this Regulation. The European Data Protection Supervisor should have the
power to impose fines on Union institutions, agencies and bodies falling within the scope of
this Regulation.
(85)  In order to ensure that the regulatory framework can be adapted where necessary, the power
to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should be delegated to the Commission
to amend the Union harmonisation legislation listed in Annex II, the high-risk AI systems
listed in Annex III, the provisions regarding technical documentation listed in Annex IV, the
content of the EU declaration of conformity in Annex V, the provisions regarding the
conformity assessment procedures in Annex VI and VII and the provisions establishing the
high-risk AI systems to which the conformity assessment procedure based on assessment of
the quality management system and assessment of the technical documentation should
apply. It is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations
during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and that those consultations be
conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of
13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making29. In particular, to ensure equal participation in the
preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all
documents at the same time as Member States’ experts, and their experts systematically
have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with the preparation of
delegated acts. Such consultations and advisory support should also be carried out in the
framework of the activities of the AI Board and its subgroups.
(86)  In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation,
implementing powers should be conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be
exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and
of the Council30. It is of particular importance that, in accordance with the principles laid
down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better Law-Making, whenever
broader expertise is needed in the early preparation of draft implementing acts, the
Commission makes use of expert groups, consults targeted stakeholders or carries out public
consultations, as appropriate. Such consultations and advisory support should also be carried
out in the framework of the activities of the AI Board and its subgroups, including the
preparation of implementing acts in relation to Articles 4, 4b and 6.
(87)  Since the objective of this Regulation cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States
and can rather, by reason of the scale or effects of the action, be better achieved at Union
level, the Union may adopt measures in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity as set
out in Article 5 TEU. In accordance with the principle of proportionality as set out in that
Article, this Regulation does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that
objective.
(87a)  In order to ensure legal certainty, ensure an appropriate adaptation period for operators and
avoid disruption to the market, including by ensuring continuity of the use of AI systems, it
is appropriate that this Regulation applies to the high-risk AI systems that have been placed
on the market or put into service before the general date of application thereof, only if, from
that date, those systems are subject to significant changes in their design or intended
purpose. It is appropriate to clarify that, in this respect, the concept of significant change
should be understood as equivalent in substance to the notion of substantial modification,
which is used with regard only to high-risk AI systems as defined in this Regulation.
(88)  This Regulation should apply from … [OP – please insert the date established in Art. 85].
However, the infrastructure related to the governance and the conformity assessment system
should be operational before that date, therefore the provisions on notified bodies and
governance structure should apply from … [OP – please insert the date – three months
following the entry into force of this Regulation]. In addition, Member States should lay
down and notify to the Commission the rules on penalties, including administrative fines,
and ensure that they are properly and effectively implemented by the date of application of
this Regulation. Therefore the provisions on penalties should apply from [OP – please insert
the date – twelve months following the entry into force of this Regulation].
(89)  The European Data Protection Supervisor and the European Data Protection Board were
consulted in accordance with Article 42(2) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1725 and delivered an
opinion on […]”.

