I. INTRODUCTION
1. The Commission adopted the proposal for a Regulation laying down harmonised rules on  artificial intelligence (Artificial Intelligence Act, hereinafter: the AI Act) on 21 April 2021.
2. The Council unanimously adopted its General Approach on the proposal on 6 December  2022, while the European Parliament (hereinafter: the EP) confirmed its position in a plenary  vote on 14 June 2023.
3. On 14 June 2023, 18 July 2023, 2-3 October 2023 and 24 October 2023 the first four political  trilogues were held, during which some of the less controversial parts of the proposal were  agreed and compromise was also found on the provisions concerning measures in support of

innovation, as well as and on the mechanism for classification of AI systems as high-risk.  Moreover, during those initial trilogues the co-legislators explored potential landing zones  with regard to the remaining issues, in particular the regulation of general purpose AI models and systems, governance, as well the prohibitions and law enforcement package.
4. On 29 November 2023 and 1 December 2023, the Committee of Permanent Representatives  granted the Presidency a revised mandate to continue the negotiations on all the outstanding  elements of the proposal. The fifth and final trilogue was held between 6 and 8 December  2023. During this extended round of negotiations the Council and the EP came to an  agreement on all political issues and successfully closed the interinstitutional negotiations.  Following this political agreement, the co-legislators proceeded to carry out further technical  work in January 2024 in order to align the text of the recitals with the text of the articles as  agreed during the final trilogue.
5. In the Annex to this document delegations will find the text of the proposal for a Regulation  laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (the AI Act), updated according to the  provisional political agreement reached at the fifth trilogue between 6 and 8 December 2023.
II. MAIN ELEMENTS OF THE COMPROMISE
1. Subject matter and scope
As regards the subject matter, the compromise text of Article 1(1) includes a high-level  statement that one of the purposes of the AI Act is to ensure a high level of protection of  health, safety and fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter, which includes democracy,  rule of law and environmental protection. However, all subsequent references in the text to  the risks addressed by the Regulation only include risks to health, safety and fundamental  rights, in line with the Council’s mandate.
Concerning the scope, the compromise text makes it clear that national security is excluded.  The wording concerning this exclusion in Article 2(3) has been fine tuned to align it more  closely with the respective language used in recently agreed legal acts, such as the Cyber  Resilience Act and the Data Act, while the text of the corresponding Recital 12a has  remained the same as in the Council’s mandate.

2. Definition of an AI system
The definition of an AI system in Article 3(1) has been modified to align it more closely  with the work of international organisations working on artificial intelligence, notably the  OECD. Moreover, the corresponding Recital 6 details further the key characteristics of the  definition and clarifies that the definition is not intended to cover simpler traditional  software systems or programming approaches, which are based on the rules defined solely  by natural persons to automatically execute operations. Additionally, the Commission has  been tasked to develop guidelines on the application of the definition of an AI system.
3. Prohibited AI practices
Regarding the list of prohibited AI practices in Article 5, the compromise text includes the  changes as previously accepted by the Committee of Permanent Representatives in the  Council’s revised mandate. This means that the list includes the prohibition of real-time  biometric identification by law enforcement authorities in publicly accessible spaces, but  with some notable and clearly defined exceptions, as listed in Article 5(1)(d), which are  now subject to a range of safeguards, including monitoring and oversight measures and  limited reporting obligations at EU level. Additional accepted prohibitions include  untargeted scraping of facial images for the purpose of a creating or expanding facial  recognition databases, emotion recognition but only at the workplace and in educational  institutions (and with exceptions for safety and medical reasons), a very limited prohibition  of biometric categorization based on certain specific beliefs or characteristics, as well as a  limited and targeted ban on individual predictive policing. The wording on the predictive  policing ban has been slightly modified and it now covers systems which assess or predict  the risk of a natural person to commit a criminal offence, based solely on the profiling of a  natural person or on assessing their personality traits and characteristics. However, this  prohibition will not apply to AI systems used to support the human assessment of the  involvement of a person in a criminal activity.
Finally, it is important to point out that as part of the compromise other biometric  categorisation systems and emotion recognition systems, as well as post-remote biometric  identification systems, which have not been included in the list of prohibitions in Article 5, have been added to Annex III (List of high-risk AI systems), with some further limitations  of their scope.
4. Post-remote biometric identification
In addition to being included in the list of high-risk AI systems in Annex III, the use of  post-remote biometric identification by law enforcement authorities has been made subject  to some additional safeguards in Article 29. These safeguards include some limited  transparency measures and the requirement for law enforcement authorities to request an  authorisation for the use of post-remote biometric identification, which could be given by a  judicial authority or an administrative authority whose decision is binding and subject to a  judicial review. This can be done prior or ex post, within 48 hours. Furthermore, the  compromise text clarifies that post-remote biometric identification should not be used for  law enforcement purposes in an untargeted way without any link to a criminal offence, a  criminal proceeding, a genuine and present or genuine and foreseeable threat of a criminal  offence or the search for a specific missing person.
5. Exceptions for law enforcement authorities
The compromise agreement preserves all the exceptions for law enforcement authorities that  were added in the Council’s revised mandate, including derogation from conformity  assessment and the possibility to start real world testing of high-risk AI systems without  prior authorisation. Nevertheless, in order to secure these concessions, the Council had to  agree that market surveillance authorities for high-risk AI systems in the field of law  enforcement would be either the data protection authorities or any other authorities  designated pursuant to conditions laid down in Articles 1 to 44 of the Law Enforcement  Directive.
6. Fundamental rights impact assessment
In line with the Council’s revised mandate, in Article 29a the compromise text includes a  light version of the obligation for some deployers to conduct a fundamental rights impact  assessment. The obligation is relatively easy to comply with, and it concerns only deployers  that are bodies governed by public law, private actors providing public services, and deployers that are banking and insurance service providers using AI systems listed as high risk in Annex III, point 5, (b) and (ca). The fundamental rights impact assessment will  need to be carried out only for aspects not covered by other legal obligations, such as Data  Protection Impact Assessment under the GDPR and will be procedurally aligned with  existing processes in order to eliminate any overlap and additional burden. Moreover,  compliance with this obligation will be facilitated by the AI Office, which has been tasked  with the development of a template for a questionnaire which deployers will be able to use  to meet the relevant requirements.
7. Testing high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes
As part of the compromise, the text of the AI Act includes provisions on testing high-risk AI  systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes, in Articles 54a and 54b.  The Council’s revised mandate has been preserved in this respect, which means that testing  high-risk AI systems in real world conditions outside AI regulatory sandboxes will be  possible, but it will be subject to a range of safeguards, which include, inter alia, the  requirement for approval from the market surveillance authority, the right for affected  persons to request to delete their data after testing in real world conditions, the right for  market surveillance authorities to request information related to testing in real world  conditions from providers, including the power to conduct inspections, limited duration of  such testing, as well as some additional safeguards designed specifically for testing in real  world conditions in the areas of law enforcement, migration, asylum and border control  management.
8. General purpose AI models
The compromise agreement includes new provisions concerning general purpose AI models  (GPAI models) in Articles 52a – 52e. These new rules introduce horizontal obligations for  all GPAI models, which will include keeping up-to-date and making available, upon request,  technical documentation to the AI Office and national competent authorities. They also  include providing certain information and documentation to downstream providers for the  purpose of compliance with the AI Act. There are some additional requirements for models  with systemic risks, which would include performing model evaluation, making risk  assessments and taking risk mitigation measures, ensuring an adequate level of cybersecurity protection, and reporting serious incidents to the AI Office and national  competent authorities. Compliance with these requirements can be achieved through codes  of practice, which will be developed by the industry, with the participation of the Member  States (through the AI Board), and facilitated by the AI Office. The drawing up of the codes  of practice should be an open process to which all interested stakeholders will be invited,  both companies as well as civil society and academia. The AI Office will also evaluate these  codes of practice and can formally approve them, or, in case they are inadequate to cover the  obligations, provide common rules for the implementation of the obligations through an  implementing act. The compromise agreement also provides that standards will be a  possibility for compliance in the future.
Classification of GPAI models as presenting systemic risks will initially depend on the  capability, either based on a quantitative threshold of the cumulative amount of compute  used for its training measured in floating point operations (FLOPs), or on an individual  designation decision of the Commission that takes into account criteria listed in Annex IXc (e.g. the number of parameters, quality and size of the dataset, input and output modalities  or the reach measures in business users).The initial FLOPs threshold for this has been set as  10^25, so higher than what the EP initially wanted but lower than in the Council’s mandate,  which was 10^26. However, in this context it is important to note that the Commission will  be obliged to adapt the threshold in the light of evolving technological developments, such  as algorithmic improvements or increased hardware efficiency, in order to keep up with the  state of the art, reflecting the capabilities recorded in the most advanced general purpose AI  models.
Regarding copyright, the compromise agreement states that providers of GPAI models will  need to put in place a policy to respect Union copyright law, as well as make publicly  available a sufficiently detailed summary about the content used for training of the general purpose AI model, based on a template provided by the AI Office. Recital 60k explains that  this summary should not be technically detailed but comprehensive at a general level, while  taking into due account the need to protect trade secrets and confidential business  information.
Finally, with regard to GPAI systems, the compromise agreement defines them as AI  systems based on GPAI models that can serve a variety of purposes. Article 28 includes rules to align them to the risk-based approach of the AI Act. Providers of such systems will  be obliged to provide all the information and elements to downstream providers of high-risk  AI systems so that they can comply with the respective requirements, including for the  purpose of conformity assessment. Article 63a further clarifies the conditions in which  national market surveillance authorities should collaborate with the AI Office to ensure the  compliance of GPAI systems that can be used directly by deployers for at least one purpose  classified as high-risk, when they consider the GPAI systems are not compliant.
9. Governance and enforcement
Linked to the agreements on GPAI models, as summarized in point 8 above, the  compromise text also includes the new rules on governance in Title VI. While for AI  systems the market surveillance system on the national level will apply, these new rules for  GPAI models provide for a new more centralised system of oversight and enforcement. For  this purpose, the AI Office will be established as a new governance structure with a number  of specific tasks in respect of GPAI models, and with a strong link with the scientific  community to support its work.
The newly proposed governance structure also includes an enhanced role for the AI Board.  Its list of tasks has been extended to give the Member States a stronger coordination role,  including with regard to AI regulatory sandboxes, consultations with stakeholders and  awareness raising activities. The AI Board will also provide opinions to the Commission on  the qualified alerts concerning general purpose AI models. The provisions on the  composition and functioning of the AI Board have been maintained as in the Council’s  General Approach.
The final text also introduces two new advisory bodies. A scientific panel of independent  experts will provide technical advice and input to the AI Office and market surveillance  authorities. The scientific panel also has a key role in the enforcement of rules for GPAI  models, as it will be able to launch qualified alerts of possible risks to the AI Office.  Building on the General Approach, Member States will have the possibility to call upon  experts of the scientific panels to support their market surveillance activities. An advisory  forum will provide stakeholder input to the Commission (including the AI Office) and to the AI Board. It will comprise a balanced selection of stakeholders, including industry, start ups, SMEs, civil society and academia.
Finally, on the issue of appointing more than one competent authority covered by Article  59(2), the compromise text maintains the Council’s position, which gives the Member States  the flexibility to appoint at least one notifying authority and at least one market surveillance  authority as national competent authorities. In addition, Member States shall designate one  market surveillance authority to act as a single point of contact.
10. Derogation from conformity assessment
In line with the Council’s mandate, the compromise text preserves the derogation from  conformity assessment in Article 47(1), and also the related exemption (urgency procedure)  for law enforcement authorities in Article 47(1a), without the need for judicial  authorisation. However, to secure this concession, it has been necessary to re-introduce in  the text the wording regarding the control of the authorisation process by the Commission,  as provided in points 3, 4 and 5 of Article 47, which were previously deleted in the  Council’s General Approach.
11. AI systems already placed on the market or put into service
Concerning AI systems already placed on the market or put into service, in the case of  public authorities which are providers or deployers of high-risk AI systems the compromise  agreement in Article 83(2) is to offer them 4 years from the entry into application to make  their systems compliant. This change does not depart significantly from the Council’s  position, as it is highly unlikely that within this 4-year period such systems would not go  through a substantial modification, which was supposed to trigger the requirement to  comply in the Council’s General Approach. Moreover, in Article 83(3) it has been agreed  that every GPAI model that is placed on the market before the entry into application of the  provisions related to GPAI models (12 months after entry into force) will have 2 years after  the date if entry into application of these provisions (3 years in total) to be brought in  compliance (irrespective of whether there is a substantial modification or not).
12. Implementing acts and delegated acts

With regard to delegated and implementing acts, the compromise text preserves the choices  as in the Council’s revised mandate, with the exception of two cases of implementing acts  where it was clarified that legally only delegated acts are possible, namely to update the  thresholds of FLOPs in Article 52a and to update the methodology for the classification of  high-impact models in Article 52b.
13. Penalties
The amounts of penalties for the infringements of the various aspects of the AI Act have  been fine tuned in Article 71. Notably, for non-compliance with the provisions concerning  prohibited AI practices outlined in Article 5, the penalty has been set at 35 million EUR or  7% of annual turnover, slightly above the limit set in the Council’s revised mandate, which  was 35 million EUR or 6.5% of annual turnover. On the other hand, the amounts of  penalties agreed for the remaining cases are slightly lower than in the Council’s position.
Finally, Article 72a sets out the fines for providers of general purpose AI models, in case of  infringements of the obligations or non-compliance with the enforcement measures, e.g.  requests for information. The maximum amount of fines has been aligned to those for  providers of high-risk AI systems. It is important to highlight that there will be an additional  grace period for providers of general purpose AI models, because no fines can be imposed  during the first year after entry into application of the rules.
14. Entry into application
On the entry of application as specified in Article 85, the compromise agreement provides  for 24 months with regard to most parts of the Regulation, with slightly shorter deadlines for  some elements, namely 6 months for prohibitions and 12 months for provisions concerning  notifying authorities and notified bodies, governance, general purpose AI models,  confidentiality and penalties, and a slightly longer deadline of 36 months for high-risk AI  systems covered by Annex II.
III. CONCLUSION

1. The Presidency invites the Committee of the Permanent Representatives to:
a. endorse the annexed compromise text as agreed with the European Parliament during  the final trilogue, and
b. mandate the Presidency to inform the European Parliament that, should the European  Parliament adopt its position at first reading, in accordance with Article 294  paragraph 3 of the Treaty, in the form set out in the compromise package contained  in the Annex to this document (subject to revision by the lawyer linguists of both  institutions), the Council would, in accordance with Article 294, paragraph 4 of the  Treaty, approve the European Parliament’s position and the act shall be adopted in  the wording which corresponds to the European Parliament’s position.

